Improved algorithm for routine monitoring of cyanobacteria and eutrophication in
inland and near-coastal waters
Mark William Matthews , Daniel Odermatt
a b,c
Abstract
This short communication introduces several previously undocumented processing steps,
arithmetic conditions, pixel flagging procedures, and improvements made to the maximum
peak height (MPH) algorithm for the Basic ENVISAT A(ATSR) and MERIS (BEAM)
processing toolbox. The improvements reduce false-positive cyanobacteria detection over
oligotrophic waters; enable pixels in clear waters affected by environmental radiances
(stray light) to be identified; and improve detection of floating aquatic vegetation using an
additional NDVI redness threshold. Several global case studies are used to illustrate these
improvements, and demonstrate new pixel flagging procedures and algorithm operation.
New results using a large in situ dataset validating the retrieval of chlorophyll-a (chl-a) for
a wide range of inland water types are presented. The MPH chl-a estimates have similar
correlation coefficients to fluorescence line height (FLH) and maximum chlorophyll index
(MCI) values. However, the variability of the slope coefficients across different water
types is significantly reduced. The results demonstrate the potential for using the MPH
algorithm as a standard product for MERIS for estimating chl-a (and trophic status) in
inland and near-coastal waters.
Keywords: cyanobacteria; eutrophication; chlorophyll-a; surface scum; aquatic
macrophytes; trophic status; water quality; remote sensing; MERIS; BEAM; maximum
peak height;
This paper has been published as:
Matthews, M. W., & Odermatt, D. (2015). Improved algorithm for routine monitoring of
cyanobacteria and eutrophication in inland and near-coastal waters. Remote Sensing of
Environment, 156, 374-382.
Department of Oceanography, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa
a
Brockmann Consult GmbH, Geesthacht, Germany
b
Odermatt & Brockmann GmbH, Zurich, Switzerland
c
1. Introduction
The maximum peak height or MPH algorithm (for details see Matthews et al., 2012) was designed
to give quantitative chlorophyll-a estimates in optically complex inland and near-coastal waters,
as well as to detect cyanobacteria blooms and surface scum, and floating aquatic macrophytes.
The algorithm uses the narrow red-edge MERIS bands positioned at 681, 709 and 753 nm and,
using the 665 and 885 nm bands as a baseline, computes the position and height of the maximum
peak at these wavelengths. The algorithm uses molecular scattering corrected bottom-of-Rayleigh
reflectances (BRR) or ρ and therefore avoids an error-prone aerosol correction over optically
BRR
complex waters. BRR is the dimensionless reflectance above the aerosol and ground system
corrected for gaseous absorption using climatological values for the gas content in the
atmospheric column, and Rayleigh scattering which relies on barometric pressure (Santer et al,
1999). This approach is used in favour of a full aerosol atmospheric correction because of the
large uncertainties associated with water leaving reflectance products over turbid inland waters.
The baseline subtraction technique effectively normalises for residual aerosol induced effects
given the relative spectral proximity of the red and near infra-red (NIR) bands. Cyanobacteria
detection is performed using distinctive spectral features in the 620 nm and 681 nm bands, and a
separate chl-a algorithm is used for these cyanobacteria-dominant waters. Floating matter
identification is performed by the detection of a maximum peak position at 753 nm, which is then
either classified as floating cyanobacteria (surface scum) or vegetation (macrophytes), depending
on whether the spectral features of cyanobacteria are present. Designed for operational use, the
MPH algorithm is intended to be broadly applicable to a wide variety of water types and trophic
status encountered in inland and near-coastal waters.
The MPH has recently been extensively tested using the MERIS full resolution (FR) archived
data from South African and global inland waters. This has highlighted the need for specific
improvements, in particular surrounding the detection of cyanobacteria in clear, oligotrophic
waters and the detection of dense floating aquatic macrophytes. The purpose of this paper is
therefore firstly to provide details on these improvements since the first version of the MPH
algorithm (Matthews et al., 2012). These improvements relate to the false-positive detection of
cyanobacteria in oligotrophic-type waters, improved detection of dense aquatic macrophytes, as
well as the introduction of a flagging procedure for pixels affected by the adjacency effect (stray
light) or sun glint induced false classifications. Secondly, the detailed algorithm structure and
processing scheme to be used for the MPH BEAM plugin is presented. And finally, the paper
shows initial validation of the MPH chl-a estimates using a selection of in situ chl-a datasets from
lakes around the world.
2. The improved MPH algorithm
Fig. 1 shows a schematic of the algorithm processing procedure. ρ is calculated from the top-
BRR
of-atmosphere (TOA) MERIS radiances using the Idepix plugin processor available in BEAM 5.
The ρ are computed for the red bands at 620, 664, 681, 709, 753 and 885 nm, which
BRR
correspond to bands numbers 6 through 10 and 14. The first step involves the calculation of the
various variables used in subsequent conditional steps. These include the identification of the
reflectance peak magnitude and position for two different spectral ranges (R , R ; λ ,
max,0 max,1 Rmax,0
λ ) used for the MPH calculation. R is the maximum reflectance magnitude in bands 8 and
Rmax,1 max,0
9, and λ is the corresponding peak position at 681 or 709 nm. Similarly, R is the
Rmax,0 max,1
maximum reflectance magnitude in bands 8 through 10, and λ is the corresponding
Rmax,1
wavelength of the peak position. MPH and MPH are calculated from the corresponding R ,
0 1 max,0
and R . The rationale behind the two MPH variables is discussed in section 4.
max,1
Other variables computed are the sun induced chlorophyll fluorescence (SICF) and the sun-
induced phycocyanin absorption and fluorescence (SIPAF) peaks, as described in Matthews et al.
(2012), and the normalised difference vegetation index (NDVI). An additional variable, called
the backscatter and absorption induced reflectance (BAIR) peak, is calculated as the height of the
709 nm peak above a baseline between 665 and 885 nm. The rationale and use of the BAIR peak
will be discussed further in section 3.
In a second step, all instances where the peak position λ is not located at 753 nm are taken to
Rmax,1
represent cases where phytoplankton or cyanobacteria are immersed or submerged in the water.
These cases are evaluated for the presence of cyanobacteria using a modified condition as follows:
If SICFpeak < 0 and SIPFpeak > 0 and BAIRpeak > 0.002, cyano_flag = TRUE.
For waters identified as cyanobacteria (cyano_flag = true) the chl-a concentration is calculated
using the algorithm for cyanobacteria defined in Matthews et al., (2012). If the resulting chl-a
concentration exceeds a certain user-defined threshold, typically 350 mg m , a flag for floating
-3
matter is raised, denoted float_flag. On the contrary, when cyano_flag (and float_flag) is false,
the chl-a algorithm from Matthews et al. (2012) for eukaryotic algae is used. Only waters with
immersed phytoplankton and λ not equal to 753 nm are considered in this second step, and
Rmax,1
therefore MPH and MPH are equivalent.
0 1
In the third step, pixels with λ = 753 nm are evaluated. The 753 nm peak is traditionally used
Rmax,1
to indicate the presence of floating vegetation or cyanobacterial scum (Matthews et al., 2012).
However this spectral feature can also occasionally be observed in clear, oligotrophic waters, and
is usually related to adjacency effects but may in rare events be caused by sun glint. A MPH
1
threshold of 0.02 is used as an indicator of legitimate floating vegetation. This effectively
excludes the adjacency induced 753 nm peak observed in oligotrophic waters. The value of this
threshold and the float_flag are discussed in more detail in section 4. In addition, a NDVI redness
index threshold value is used to test for the presence of floating vegetation. The floating flag is
therefore defined as follows:
If λRmax,1 = 753 nm and MPH1 ≥ 0.02 and NDVI ≥ 0.2,
float_flag = TRUE, adj_flag = FALSE
The identification of adjacency affected pixels is similarly performed using the reverse
expression:
If λRmax,1 = 753 nm and MPH1<0.02 and NDVI < 0.2,
adj_flag = TRUE, float_flag = FALSE
For waters where an adj_flag is raised, valid chl-a retrievals are still feasible in most cases using
the peak height at 681 or 709 nm, however outliers may occur.
The fourth step enables the separation of floating vegetation and cyanobacteria scum for all cases
where the float_flag is raised and corresponds largely to step 2 omitting evaluation of the
BAIR . If cyanobacteria are detected in these floating matter cases, chl-a concentration is
peak
calculated using the same equation as in step 2 (Matthews et al., 2012). However if the cyano_flag
is not raised, no calculation of chl-a is performed, as these are assumed to be floating aquatic
macrophytes or vegetation. Thus the four cases identified by the algorithm are: normal immersed
eukaryotic phytoplankton; submerged or mixed cyanobacterial blooms; floating cyanobacteria
blooms or surface scum; and floating aquatic macrophytes or vegetation. Examples of each of
these cases illustrating the BRR spectrum, the position and height of the peak in the red, and the
magnitude of the MPH variable, are shown in fig. 2, and the corresponding chl-a products are
shown in fig. 3.
3. Improved cyanobacteria detection
The rationale for the inclusion of the additional BAIR peak in the cyanobacteria flag is discussed
here. When testing the MPH algorithm in some clear water lower biomass oligo/mesotrophic
scenarios it became apparent that there were numerous cases of false-positive (erroneous)
cyanobacteria detections using the flag as previously defined by Matthews et al. (2012).
Cyanobacteria detection in low biomass oligo/mesotrophic scenarios using MERIS is likely to be
either very challenging or infeasible. Studies show that cyanobacteria phycocyanin pigment
related features only clearly become visible at high biomass chl-a concentrations greater than ±
20 mg m (Kutser et al., 2006, Metsamaa et al., 2006). This is further complicated by atmospheric
-3
aerosols that affect the shape and magnitude of the BRR spectra, and the signal-to-noise ratio
limits of the MERIS detectors, especially in full resolution mode, which is typically between 200
and 500 for red bands (Hu et al., 2012). Given these limitations, detection of cyanobacteria related
features from MERIS FR imagery (or any other currently available satellite imagery) at
low/medium biomass is unlikely. Therefore cyanobacteria detection should be attempted in
medium/high biomass eutrophic waters, i.e. chl-a > ± 20 mg m , where there is sufficient
-3
resolution of cyanobacteria-specific optical features.
A simple way of detecting eutrophic waters suitable for detecting cyanobacteria is to test for the
presence of a 709 nm peak position (MERIS band 9) using the BAIR variable. This peak typically
overwhelms, or becomes larger than, the fluorescence-related 681 nm peak in eutrophic waters
with chl-a values greater than approx. 20 mg m (e.g. Gitelson et al., 1992). The modified
-3
implementation of the cyano_flag requires that the BAIR variable be positive and larger than
0.002 before evaluating the BRR spectrum for cyanobacteria-specific features. The additional use
of the BAIR peak threshold effectively avoids the false-positive detection of cyanobacteria in
oligo/mesotrophic waters thereby providing a more robust measure of the presence of
cyanobacteria in eutrophic waters. Fig. 3 shows an example of false-positive cyanobacteria
detection in clear waters using the original flag defined by Matthews et al., (2012), and the
corrected results using the modified flag. The false-positive cyano flagging in this Lake Michigan
scene was likely caused by residual aerosol-related features in the BRR due to anomalous
atmospheric aerosols or cloud. Similar improvements were found in other oligotrophic lakes (not
shown).
4. Adjacency effect flag and thresholds for interpretation of the 753 nm peak
This section discusses the rationale behind the usage of the MPH variable to identify adjacency
1
effect affected pixels. In spatially constrained inland and near-coastal waters, stray light from
typically brighter land pixels surrounding, or adjacent to, a dark water target, causes a noticeable
elevation of radiances in the NIR bands, which often contribute more than 50% of the at-sensor
radiance (Odermatt et al., 2008). Among the bands used by the MPH algorithm, the NIR 753 nm
band used to identify floating matter is particularly affected. In these cases, BRR for the 753 nm
band may be slightly higher than for the other candidate MPH bands. If left unconstrained this
would lead to erroneous classification of floating matter in these cases. In order to avoid this error,
a minimum threshold for MPH is required in order to assign a valid floating flag.
1
In cases of adjacency affects from land and cloud, both MPH and MPH have small values (<
0 1
0.01). In the case of dense floating vegetation, MPH may be small due to the steep red spectral
0
slope typical of vegetation, however MPH values usually remain larger than 0.02. For cases in
1
which viable floating vegetation or cyanobacteria surface scum exists, MPH will certainly be
1
larger than 0.02, which is approximately the MPH value where cyanobacteria become discernible
(see fig. 4 in Matthews et al., 2012). A typical NDVI value of 0.2 is used to separate water from
submerged aquatic vegetation and floating aquatic macrophytes (Fusilli et al., 2011). By using a
threshold value of MPH to constrain the 753 nm peak usage, in addition to the NDVI threshold
1
which identifies spectral redness associated with vegetation, the invalid inclusion of adjacency
affected pixels as floating vegetation is effectively avoided in clear waters.
This condition is at the same time used to flag pixels that are most likely contaminated by the
adjacency effect using the adjacency flag (adj_flag). These are cases where there is a small 753
nm peak that is not associated with valid floating vegetation or cyanobacteria scum, and is likely
to result from stray light. The cyano_flag is forced to a false value for adj_flag pixels, as the
adjacency effect is likely to occur in clear oligotrophic waters only, and unusual spectral shapes
are also possible. Fig. 5 provides examples of the three possible cases associated with a 753 nm
peak position. An example from Taihu shows how floating cyanobacteria scum is effectively
separated from emergent macrophyte vegetation. The example from Lake Michigan shows how
pixels adjacent to land are flagged for the adjacency effect, which is caused by scattering of light
from adjacent brighter land pixels into the sensor field of view: these effects may be observed
many kilometers offshore (Santer & Schmechtig, 2000). This effect is not the result of image
blurring by application of any geo-rectification or image processing techniques. The adj_flag may
also be raised for pixels adjacent to cloud, and for pixels affected by high sun glint.
5. In situ validation of MPH chl-a estimates
The MPH was implemented in the Calvalus processing system (Boettcher et al., 2012), which
allows for fast and iterative processing of the MERIS FR 2002-2012 database. Two
comprehensive processing modes were applied for algorithm assessment. The accuracy of the
MPH chl-a estimates were evaluated by means of a large collection of several thousand in situ
chl-a reference measurements from more than 40 lakes around the world (Odermatt and
Brockmann, in prep.), and was found to provide more robust chl-a estimates than several other
algorithms in eutrophic to hypertrophic waters. On the other hand, monthly and yearly averaged
Level 3 aggregates were produced for the full MERIS FR archive. Quality checking of these Level
3 products and backtracking of unexpected features allowed the identification of cases where the
MPH failed so that the improved process conditions and thresholds for MPH discussed in this
paper could be derived.
Matchup analysis was performed for near-simultaneously acquired in situ and valid satellite chl-
a estimates (same day and GPS position). The mean of 9 pixels surrounding the sampling point
was used, with the standard deviation providing a rough error estimate for the satellite estimates.
Fig. 6 shows the performance of linear regression analysis of MPH algorithm chl-a estimates
versus in situ chl-a for 9 large, routinely collected monitoring datasets of different lakes, where
maximum regression coefficients R > 0.6 were achieved using a choice of about 40 different
processing schemes. For comparison, the index values for the BRR derived fluorescence line
height (FLH) and maximum chlorophyll index (MCI) were also regressed with in situ chl-a
(Gower & King, 2006; note these processors do not provide actual quantitative chl-a estimates,
only index values). The performance in terms of regression coefficient is not significantly
different, with the MPH variable giving the best correlation with chl-a in 4 cases, the MCI in 3,
and the FLH in 2. However, the regression slopes vary much more widely for the MCI and FLH,
confirming that MPH is more suitable for the derivation of absolute concentration values across
different trophic ranges and water types.
Fig. 7 shows some of the matchup scatter plots for the datasets in Figure 6. The data markers are
coloured according to the optical water types classification for optically complex waters by Moore
et al. (2014), after atmospheric correction (see reference for description of water types). In general
the MPH tends to overestimate with respect to the in situ chl-a concentration. Nevertheless the
ability of the algorithm to accurately identify the gross chl-a range (trophic status) and its stable
performance across diverse water types is evident. However, the results also indicate the need for
re-training of the MPH algorithm coefficients using a global dataset.
6. Outlook
The initial validation results have indicated both the promise of the MPH approach, as well as the
need for improved parameterisation of the initial algorithm relationships derived from the smaller
dataset in Matthews et al. (2012). There are already studies which demonstrate the usefulness of
the MPH-type approach with various satellite sensors possessing a number of red and NIR band
positions such as the hyperspectral imager for the coastal ocean (Ryan et al., 2014). The improved
MPH algorithm is available as a plug-in tool in BEAM Version 5 (downloaded from
http://www.brockmann-consult.de/cms/web/beam/welcome). It will be used to process MERIS
L3 water quality products for 300 lakes around the world in the scope of ESA’s Diversity II
project. Monthly, yearly and decadal products for these lakes will be made publicly available.
The MPH module will also be adapted for use with the future Sentinel-3 ocean and land colour
instrument, which is scheduled for launch in mid-2015. This study emphasises the potential of the
MPH algorithm to be used as a standard product for obtaining global estimates of trophic status
and cyanobacteria blooms for the world’s lakes.
7. Acknowledgements
The authors made equal contributions to the manuscript. The implementation of the MPH BEAM
plugin was financed by ESA’s Diversity II project. D. Odermatt was funded by the EU-FP-7
Marie Curie PEOPLE/IAPP project ‘WaterS’ and ESA’s Diversity II project. We thank Tom
Block for implementing the MPH BEAM plugin, and Martin Boettcher for developing the
Calvalus matchup instance. All people and organizations providing in situ chlorophyll data for
validation are gratefully acknowledged. Erie and Ontario data were provided by Caren Binding
of EC, after analysis by Canada's National Laboratory for Environmental Testing. Vanern data
were provided by SwAM with support by Petra Philipson (Brockmann Geomatics). Paijanne data
were provided by Kari Kallio and Sampsa Koponen of SYKE. Balaton data were provided by
KdKVI with support by Stephanie Palmer (Balaton Limnological Research Institute).
Haartbeesport and Bronkhorstspruit data were provided by DWA. Kasumigaura data were
provided by CEBES/NIES, through the Lake Kasumigaura database at http://db.cger.nies.go.jp
with support by Kumiko Totsu (CEBES/NIES). Zug data were provided by Peter Keller (Canton
of Zug Env. Protection Agency). MERIS data was provided by the European Space Agency.
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the MPH algorithm processing procedure.
Figure 2: Examples from various inland and near-coastal waters showing different cases of the
MPH algorithm and the position and height of the maximum peak in the red and NIR bands. False
colour RGBs were produced using using MERIS bands 6, 5 and 2.
Figure 3: As for fig. 2 but showing the estimated concentration of chl-a computed by the MPH
algorithm. Flags are as follows: dark green = floating cyanobacteria; magenta = floating
vegetation; shaded pixels = cyanobacteria.
Figure 4: MPH flags derived from a MERIS FR scene from 2003-06-05 over Lake Michigan
contaminated by high aerosols and sun glint. Flag colours are as follows: cyanobacteria (white),
floating cyanobacteria (dark green), floating vegetation (magenta), adjacency affected pixels (red)
and other water (black). A) False-positive cyanobacteria detection in apparent in white speckling
over much of the lake. B) The modified cyanobacteria flagging procedure removes the erroneous
cyanobacteria detections.
Figure 5: MPH flags for imagery corresponding to fig. 2 for A) Taihu and B) Lake Michigan.
Floating vegetation (magenta) are noticeable in the southeast of Taihu, while cyanobacteria scum
(dark green) is detected in the northwest. In Lake Michigan, adjacency effect affected pixels (red)
are flagged around the shoreline, and the bloom in Green Bay is identified as cyanobacteria
(white).
Figure 6: Comparison of validation results for MPH chl-a (top), FLH (centre) and MCI (bottom),
using BRR for 9 different in situ chl-a datasets. Bar height indicates correlation coefficient R,
median and counts of in situ data are indicated above.
Figure 7: Validation scatter plots for several lakes and datasets. (●) represent 3x3 MERIS pixels
where no cyanobacteria presence is indicated, (■) include at least one cyanobacteria flagged pixel.
Top to bottom, left to right; Erie (Environment Canada, EC), Zug (Canton of Zug Env. Protection
Agency), Vanern (Swedish Agency for Marine and Water Management, SwAM), Paijanne
(Finnish Environment Agency, SYKE), Ontario (Environment Canada), Balaton (Central
Transdanubian Regional Inspectorate for Environmental Protection, Nature Conservation and
Water Management, KdKVI), Lake Hartbeespoort (Republic of South Africa, Department of
Water Affairs, DWA), Kasumigaura (Center for Environmental Biology and Ecosystem Studies
CEBES, Japanese National Institute for Environmental Studies NIES), Bronkhorstspruit (DWA).
The optical water types are also indicated.
8. References
Boettcher, M., Fomferra, N., Zuehlke, M., Brockmann, C., Fast processing and exploitation of full-mission
datasets for ESA CCI, 3rd MERIS/AATSR and OLCI/SLSTR preparatory workshop, ESA ESRIN, Oct.
2012
Fusilli, L., Collins, M. O., Laneve, G., Palombo, a., Pignatti, S., & Santini, F. (2013). Assessment of the
abnormal growth of floating macrophytes in Winam Gulf (Kenya) by using MODIS imagery time series.
International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation, 20, 33–41.
Gitelson, A. (1992). The peak near 700 nm on radiance spectra of algae and water: relationships of its
magnitude and position with chlorophyll concentration. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 13(17),
3367–3373.
Gower, J. & King, S. (2006). FLH and MCI products from MERIS: Fluorescence, red tides, Sargassum and
blooms in ice. In ESA/ESRIN (Ed.), Proceedings of the 2nd Working Meeting on MERIS and AATSR
Calibration and Geophysical Validation. Frascati, Italy.
Hu, C., Feng, L., Lee, Z., Davis, C. O., Mannino, A., McClain, C. R., & Franz, B. A. (2012). Dynamic
range and sensitivity requirements of satellite ocean color sensors: learning from the past. Applied Optics,
51(25), 6045–6062.
Kutser, T., Metsamaa, L., Strömbeck, N., & Vahtmäe, E. (2006). Monitoring cyanobacterial blooms by
satellite remote sensing. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 67(1-2), 303–312.
Matthews, M.W., Bernard, S. & Robertson, L. 2012. An algorithm for detecting trophic status (chlorophyll-
a), cyanobacterial-dominance, surface scums and floating vegetation in inland and coastal waters. Remote
Sensing of Environment 124, 637–652.
Odermatt, D., & Brockmann, C. In prep. Title here.
Metsamaa, L., Kutser, T., & Stroembeck, N. (2006). Recognising cyanobacterial blooms based on their
optical signature: a modelling study. Boreal Environment Research, 11(6), 493–506.
Moore, T. S., Dowell, M. D., Bradt, S. & Ruiz Verdu, A. (2014). An optical water type framework for
selecting and blending retrievals from bio-optical algorithms in lakes and coastal waters. Remote Sensing
of Environment, 143, 97-111.
Odermatt, D., Kiselev, S., Heege, T., Kneubühler, M., & Itten, K. I. (2008). Adjacency effect considerations
and air/water constituent retrieval for Lake Constance. In ESA/ESRIN (Ed.), Proceedings of the 2nd
MERIS/(A)ATSR user workshop. Frascati, Italy.
Ryan, J., Davis, C., Tufillaro, N., Kudela, R., & Gao, B.-C. (2014). Application of the Hyperspectral Imager
for the Coastal Ocean to Phytoplankton Ecology Studies in Monterey Bay, CA, USA. Remote Sensing,
6(2), 1007–1025.
Santer, R., Carrere, V., Dubuisson, P., & Roger, J. C. (1999). Atmospheric correction over land for MERIS.
International Journal of Remote Sensing, 20(9), 1819–1840.
Santer, R., & Schmechtig, C. (2000). Adjacency effects on water surfaces: primary scattering
approximation and sensitivity study. Applied Optics, 39(3), 361–375.