UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
WASHINGTON, DC 20460
OFFICE OF CHEMICAL SAFETY
AND POLLUTION PREVENTION
March 23, 2022
Lei Han, Ph.D.
Head of Regulatory Affairs
SePRO Corporation
11550 N. Meridian Street Suite 600
Carmel, IN 46032
Subject: Registration Review Label Mitigation for Copper Compounds
Product Name: CAPTAIN LIQUID COPPER ALGAECIDE
EPA Registration Number: 67690-9
Application Date: February 04, 2019
Decision Number: 559224
Dear Dr. Han:
The Agency, in accordance with the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act
(FIFRA), as amended, has completed reviewing all the information submitted with your
application to support the Registration Review of the above referenced product in connection
with the Copper Compounds Interim Decision, and has concluded that your submission is
acceptable. The label referred to above, submitted in connection with registration under FIFRA,
as amended, is acceptable.
Should you wish to add/retain a reference to the company’s website on your label, then please be
aware that the website becomes labeling under the Federal Insecticide Fungicide and Rodenticide
Act and is subject to review by the Agency. If the website is false or misleading, the product
would be misbranded and unlawful to sell or distribute under FIFRA section 12(a)(1)(E). 40
CFR 156.10(a)(5) list examples of statements EPA may consider false or misleading. In addition,
regardless of whether a website is referenced on your product’s label, claims made on the
website may not substantially differ from those claims approved through the registration process.
Therefore, should the Agency find or if it is brought to our attention that a website contains false
or misleading statements or claims substantially differing from the EPA approved registration,
the website will be referred to the EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance.
A stamped copy of your labeling is enclosed for your records. This labeling supersedes
all previously accepted labeling. You must submit one copy of the final printed labeling
before you release the product for shipment with the new labeling. In accordance with 40
CFR 152.130(c), you may distribute or sell this product under the previously approved
labeling for 12 months from the date of this letter. After 12 months, you may only
distribute or sell this product if it bears this new revised labeling or subsequently
approved labeling. “To distribute or sell” is defined under FIFRA section 2(gg) and its
implementing regulation at 40 CFR 152.3.
Reg Review Label Acceptable v.20151230
Page 2 of 2
EPA Reg. No. 67690-9
Decision No. 559224
If you have any questions about this letter, please contact Srijana Shrestha by phone at 202-566-
2329, or via email at shrestha.srijana@epa.gov.
Sincerely,
Linda Arrington, Branch Chief
Risk Management and Implementation Branch 4
Pesticide Re-Evaluation Division
Office of Pesticide Programs
Enclosure: Stamped Label
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
[Front of label booklet, ALL containers]
NOT
COPPER GROUP HERBICIDE
CLASSIFIED
Captain®
Mar23,2022
LIQUID COPPER ALGAECIDE
67690-9
For use in still or flowing aquatic sites including: golf course, ornamental, fish,
irrigation and fire ponds and aquaculture including fish and shrimp; fresh water lakes,
ponds, and fish hatcheries; potable water reservoirs; and crop and non-crop irrigation
and drainage systems (canals, laterals and ditches) and chemigation systems.
Active Ingredient
Copper Ethanolamine Complex† (Mixed CAS#'s 82027-59-6 & 14215-52-2).........28.2%
Other Ingredients ....................................................................................................71.8%
TOTAL ....................................................................................................................100.0%
†Metallic copper equivalent = 9.1%
KEEP OUT OF REACH OF CHILDREN
DANGER/PELIGRO
Si usted no entiende la etiqueta, busque a alguien para que se la explique a usted en detalle.
(If you do not understand the label, find someone to explain it to you in detail.)
FIRST AID
If in eyes (cid:120) Hold eye open and rinse slowly and gently with water for 15 - 20 minutes.
(cid:120) Remove contact lenses, if present, after the first 5 minutes, then continue
rinsing eye.
(cid:120) Call a poison control center or doctor for treatment advice.
If on skin or (cid:120) Take off contaminated clothing.
clothing (cid:120) Rinse skin immediately with plenty of water for 15 - 20 minutes.
(cid:120) Call a poison control center or doctor for treatment advice.
If swallowed (cid:120) Call a poison control center or doctor immediately for treatment advice.
(cid:120) Have person sip a glass of water if able to swallow.
(cid:120) Do not induce vomiting unless told to do so by a poison control center or
doctor.
(cid:120) Do not give anything by mouth to an unconscious person.
If inhaled (cid:120) Move person to fresh air.
(cid:120) If person is not breathing, call 911 or an ambulance, then give artificial
respiration, preferably mouth-to-mouth if possible.
(cid:120) Call a poison control center or doctor for further treatment advice.
HOTLINE NUMBER
Have the product container or label with you when calling a poison control center or doctor, or
going for treatment. In case of emergency endangering health or the environment involving
this product, call INFOTRAC at 1-800-535-5053.
NOTE TO PHYSICIAN: Probable mucosal damage may contraindicate the use of gastric
lavage.
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
Refer to label booklet for additional Precautionary Information and Directions for Use
including First Aid and Storage and Disposal.
Notice: Read the entire label before using. Use only according to label directions. Before
buying or using this product, read Warranty Disclaimer and Misuse statements in label
booklet. If terms are unacceptable, return at once, unopened.
EPA Reg. No. 67690-9 EPA Est. No. _______________
FPL20220308 [P/N]__________
SePRO Corporation • 11550 N. Meridian Street, Suite 600 • Carmel, IN 46032, U.S.A.
[Algaecide] Net contents _______ (Nonrefillable)
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
[Label booklet text, ALL containers]
PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS
HAZARDS TO HUMANS AND DOMESTIC ANIMALS
Danger. Corrosive. Causes irreversible eye damage. Causes skin irritation. Harmful if
swallowed. Harmful if absorbed through skin. Harmful if inhaled. Do not get in eyes,
on skin, or on clothing. Avoid breathing mist or spray vapor. When handling, wear
protective eyewear, clothing, and chemical-resistant gloves as described under the
section of this label pertaining to Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). Wash skin
thoroughly with soap and water after handling and before eating, drinking, chewing
gum, or using tobacco. Remove and wash contaminated clothing before reuse.
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (PPE)
Applicators and other handlers must wear:
(cid:120) Coveralls worn over short-sleeved shirt and short pants;
(cid:120) Socks and chemical resistant footwear;
(cid:120) Chemical-resistant gloves made of Barrier Laminate; Butyl Rubber ≥ 14 mil; Nitrile Rubber
≥ 14 mils; Neoprene Rubber ≥ 14 mils; Natural Rubber ≥ 14 mils; Polyethylene, Polyvinyl
chloride ≥ 14 mils, or Viton ≥ 14 mils; and
(cid:120) Protective eyewear (such as goggles, safety glasses, or face shield); and
(cid:120) A chemical-resistant apron when mixing and loading or cleaning equipment.
Exception: Aquatic Subsurface Application or Closed Application System
After Captain has been diluted or tank mixed with water, users must, at a minimum, wear
(Note - Mixers and loaders for this application method must still wear the PPE as described in
the above section):
(cid:120) Long-sleeved shirt and long pants; and
(cid:120) Shoes plus socks.
USER SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
Follow manufacturer’s instructions for cleaning/maintaining PPE. If no such instructions for
washables exist, use detergent and hot water. Keep and wash PPE separately from other
laundry. Discard clothing and other absorbent material that have been drenched or heavily
contaminated with this product’s concentrate. Do not reuse them.
ENGINEERING CONTROLS
Pilots must use an enclosed cab that meets the definition listed in the WPS for agricultural
pesticides (40 CFR 170.305).
USER SAFETY RECOMMENDATIONS
Users should:
(cid:120) Wash thoroughly with soap and water after handling and before eating, drinking, chewing
gum, using tobacco, or using the toilet.
(cid:120) Remove clothing/PPE immediately if pesticide gets inside. Then wash thoroughly and put
on clean clothing.
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
(cid:120) Remove PPE immediately after handling this product. Wash the outside of gloves before
removing. As soon as possible, wash thoroughly and change into clean clothing.
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS
Fish Advisory Statement: This copper product is toxic to fish and aquatic organisms. Unlike
most organic pesticides, copper is an element and will not break down in the environment and
will therefore accumulate with repeated applications. Copper is a micronutrient, but its
pesticidal application rate exceeds the amount of copper needed as a nutrient.
DIRECTIONS FOR USE
It is a violation of Federal Law to use this product in a manner inconsistent with its labeling.
Read all directions for use carefully before applying this product. Use only according to label
directions.
Do not apply this product in a way that concentrate will contact workers or other persons,
either directly or through drift; only protected handlers may be in close proximity to the mixing
area or application equipment while in use.
PRODUCT INFORMATION
Captain® is a chelated copper formulation that is effective in controlling a broad range of green
and blue-green (cyanobacteria) algae, including filamentous, planktonic and macrophytic.
Captain is also an effective herbicide on submersed weed species with susceptibility to copper.
The ethanolamines in Captain reduce the precipitation of copper with carbonates and
bicarbonates in the water.
Treatment with this product will not by itself make water potable. For applications in waters
destined for use as drinking water, those waters must receive additional and separate potable
water treatment. Do not apply more than 1.0 ppm as metallic copper in any waters during any
single application.
Treatment Notes
Product performance is enhanced under certain conditions. SePRO Corporation recommends
consulting a SePRO Aquatic Specialist for guidance in implementing a treatment program to
achieve optimal results. To achieve optimum effectiveness:
(cid:120) Treat when growth first begins to appear (if possible) or when target vegetation is actively
growing.
(cid:120) Apply in a manner that will ensure even product distribution within the treatment area.
(cid:120) Use a high-pressure surface spray application to break up dense floating algal mats.
(cid:120) In heavily infested areas, a second application may be necessary. Retreat areas if
regrowth begins to appear or if seasonal control is desired. Repeating application of
Captain too soon after initial application may have no effect.
Waters treated with this product may be hazardous to aquatic organisms. Treatment of
aquatic weeds and algae can result in oxygen loss from decomposition of dead biomass. This
oxygen loss can cause fish and invertebrate suffocation. To minimize this hazard, do not treat
more than ½ of the water body and wait at least 14 days between treatments to avoid
depletion of oxygen due to decaying vegetation (excluding water infrastructure and constructed
conveyances such as drainage canals, ditches and pipelines or intakes and aqueducts for
drinking water or irrigation use). Begin treatment along the shore and proceed outwards in
bands to allow fish to move into untreated areas. Consult with the State or local agency with
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
primary responsibility for regulating pesticides before applying to public waters, to determine if
a permit is required.
Application of algaecides to high density blooms of cyanobacteria can result in the release of
intracellular contents into the water. Some of these intracellular compounds are known
mammalian hepato- and nervous system toxins. Therefore, to minimize the risk of toxin
leakage, manage cyanobacteria effectively in order to avoid applying this product when blooms
of toxin-producing cyanobacteria are present at high density. In situations where rapidly
reproducing toxic algal species pose a public health threat to drinking or recreational water
resources, applicators must receive authorization from applicable state, local or tribal water
resources authorities to apply copper at intervals shorter than 14 days should the circumstance
demand.
Certain water conditions including low pH (≤6.5), low dissolved organic carbon (DOC) levels
(3.0 mg/L or lower) and “soft” waters (i.e. alkalinity less than 50 mg/L) increases the potential
acute toxicity to non-target aquatic organisms. The application rates on this label are
appropriate for water with pH values > 6.5, DOC levels >3.0 mg/L, and alkalinity greater than
50 mg/L. Avoid treating waters with pH values <6.5, DOC levels <3.0, and alkalinity less than
50 ppm (e.g., soft or acid waters), as koi, trout and other sensitive species of fish may be killed
under such conditions.
Consult your state department of natural resources or fish and game agency before applying
this product to public waters. Permits may be required before treating such waters.
Resistance Management
Water bodies or management units should be scouted prior to application to identify the weed
species present and their growth stage to determine if the intended application will be effective.
Water bodies or management units should be scouted after application to verify that the
treatment was effective.
Suspected resistant weeds may be identified by these indicators:
(cid:120) Failure to control a weed species normally controlled by the product at the dose applied,
especially if control is achieved on adjacent weeds;
(cid:120) A spreading patch of non-controlled plants of a particular weed species; and
(cid:120) Surviving plants mixed with controlled individuals of the same species.
Report any incidence of non-performance of this product against a particular weed species to
your retailer, or local SePRO representative at 1-800-419-7779. If resistance is suspected,
treat weed escapes with an herbicide having a different mechanism of action and/or use non-
chemical means to remove escapes, as practical, with the goal of preventing further
reproduction.
Implement the Early Detection, Rapid Response practice and Maintenance Control by using
the following practices where possible:
(cid:120) Identify weeds present in a management unit through scouting or history of the water body
and understand the biology of target species.
(cid:120) Applications should target weeds when populations are small and there is low biomass,
early in the season to maximize efficacy.
(cid:120) Applications should be made so that the herbicide contacts the weed. Use the appropriate
application method for the use site/weed/chemical combination.
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
(cid:120) Weed escapes should not be allowed to go to seed or produce asexual vegetative
propagules.
(cid:120) Use a diversified approach toward weed management. Whenever possible incorporate
multiple weed-control practices such as mechanical control, biological management
practices, and rotation of MOAs.
(cid:120) Time applications to have the highest probability for control and minimize need for follow-up
control measures. Apply during conditions that minimize herbicide degradation (light
/temperature/microbes) and/or dissipation (water exchange).
Contact your local SePRO representative, local water management agency, or extension
agent to find out if suspected resistant weeds to this MOA have been found in your region. If
resistant biotypes of target weeds have been reported, use the application rates of this product
specified or your local conditions. Tank mix products so that there are multiple effective
mechanisms of actions for each target weed.
Restrictions
(cid:120) DO NOT apply Captain directly to, or otherwise permit it to come into contact with any
desirable plants as injury may result.
(cid:120) DO NOT apply in such a way that concentrated product comes in contact with crops,
ornamentals, grass or other desirable plants.
(cid:120) When treating aquaculture ponds when fish are present, DO NOT exceed a concentration
of 0.4 ppm during any single application when targeting nuisance algae.
(cid:120) Pilots must use an enclosed cab that meets the definition listed in the WPS for agricultural
pesticides (40 CFR 170.305).
Precautions
(cid:120) Wash spray equipment thoroughly before and after each application.
(cid:120) Contents may cause bluing where marcite plaster has been etched.
APPLICATION DIRECTIONS
For aquatic weed control (including algae and vascular plants), do not exceed a concentration
of 1.0 ppm copper (3 gallons of product or 2.74 lbs metallic copper per acre-foot) during any
single application.
Whole Waterbodies
Maximum annual application rate of 21.9 lbs of metallic copper per acre-foot (8 applications
per year at up to 1 ppm). This rate/frequency is calculated based on staggering the treatment
of each half of the water body every 14 days (at a rate of 2.74 lbs. metallic copper per acre-
foot = 1 ppm) for eight months (244 days). In situations where rapidly reproducing toxic algal
species pose a public health threat to drinking or recreational water resources, applicators
must receive authorization from applicable state, local or tribal water resources authorities to
apply copper in excess of 21.9 lbs of metallic copper per acre-foot (8 applications per year at
up to 1 ppm).
Partial Waterbodies
For large waterbodies such as lakes and reservoirs that support aquatic habitat, this product
may be applied in multiple individual treatments to different, discreet sections of a waterbody,
or water management units, within the 14-day retreatment interval, provided that the sum of
those areas together constitute no more than half of the total area of the entire waterbody.
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
Maximum annual application rate of 46.6 lbs. of metallic copper per acre-foot per year (17
applications per year at up to 1 ppm). This rate/frequency is calculated based on the maximum
number of possible applications allowed based on a 14-day minimum (at a rate of 2.74 lbs.
metallic copper per acre-foot = 1 ppm) retreatment interval for eight months (244 days). Do not
apply more than 46.6 lbs. of metallic copper to a water management unit, regardless of the
pest(s) targeted by applications. In situations where rapidly reproducing toxic algal species
pose a public health threat to drinking or recreational water resources, applicators must
receive authorization from applicable state, local or tribal water resources authorities to apply
copper in excess of 46.6 lbs. of metallic copper per acre-foot per year for a single water
management unit.
Pre-Application Dose Determination
For algae and aquatic plant treatments, applicators should conduct an initial dose
determination test simulating a full scale treatment program to determine the minimum
efficacious concentrations for eliminating the target species, unless an effective dose is
already known for the given target pest population.
Surface Spray/Injection Algaecide Application
For effective control, proper application rates should be maintained between 0.2 and 1.0 ppm.
The application rates in Table 1 are based on static or minimal flow situations. Where
significant dilution occurs from untreated waters or loss of water, Captain may have to be
metered in (refer to the Drip System or Metering Pump Application for Flowing Water
Treatments section of this label) to maintain adequate exposure times.
Identify the algae growth present as one of the following types: planktonic (suspended),
filamentous (matforming), or macrophytic algae (chara/nitella).
Determine the surface acreage (1 acre = 43,560 ft.2) and average depth of infested area.
Refer to Table1 to determine gallons of Captain to apply per surface acre.
TABLE 1
Application Rates
Dose Rates
Algae Type
Gallons
or PPM Treatment Comments
per Acre
Species Copper
Foot
Use lower rates for light infestations. Use
Planktonic
0.2 - 1.0† 0.6 - 3.0 higher rates on heavy blooms and where
(Suspended)
algae masses are clumped and accumulated.
Use lower rates for early season applications,
light infestations or treatment of regrowth.
Filamentous
0.2 - 1.0† 0.6 - 3.0 Use higher rates on surface mats and species
(Mat-forming)
such as Pithophora, Cladophora, Lyngbya,
and Hydrodictyon.
Macrophytic Use lower rates for new infestations or early
(Chara/Nitella/Starry season growth. Use higher rates on older,
0.4 - 1.0 1.2 - 3.0
Stonewort) established calcified plants. Apply as close to
plant growth as possible.
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
† For planktonic and filamentous algae, Captain may be applied up to 1.0 ppm when growth conditions require
higher rates and for difficult to control species.
For dense infestations of filamentous algae or where Hydrodictyon, Cladophora or Pithophora
are present, apply the higher rate in the rate range. Filamentous algae species are easier to
control before floating to the water’s surface (when they are forming on the pond/lake bottom).
An adjuvant, such as d-limonene or similar surfactant, may be added for enhanced control of
floating mats or difficult to control species of algae. Follow surfactant labeling instructions for
application rates and use directions.
For planktonic (suspended) algae and freefloating filamentous algae mats, base application
rates on treating to depths where algae are present (e.g. the upper 3 to 4 feet of water). For
dense infestations and in certain other situations, it may be necessary to calculate rates based
on the depth of known algae infestation (e.g. >4 feet) or require treating the entire water
column in the target area. To calculate the application rate per surface acre, multiply the
application rate in Table 1 (0.6 to 3.0 Gallon per Acre Foot) by the average depth of infestation,
or average water depth if infestation reaches the entire water column.
As a surface or subsurface application, Captain may be applied diluted or undiluted, whichever
is most suitable to ensure uniform coverage of the area to be treated. Dilution with water may
be necessary at the lower application rates. Dilute the required amount of product with enough
water to ensure even distribution in the treated area with the type of equipment being used.
For best results, dilute this product in water to provide a minimum spray mix of 20 to 50 gallons
per acre; in areas with heavy infestations of filamentous algae, a total tank mix of >50 gallons
per acre may be necessary; break up floating algae mats before spraying or while application
is being made.
Submersed Plant Control Applications
Captain can be applied to control hydrilla (Hydrilla verticillata), egeria (Egeria densa), and
other aquatic weeds with susceptibility to copper. Apply at a rate to achieve 0.75 to 1.0 ppm
copper (2.3 to 3.0 Gallons Captain/Acre foot). In heavily infested areas, a second application
after the 14 day retreatment interval may be necessary.
Drip System or Metering Pump Application for Flowing Water Treatments
For use in potable water, canals, ditches, and irrigation and drainage systems.
For optimal control, apply Captain as soon as algae begin active growth or interfere noticeably
with normal delivery of water (clogging of lateral head gates, suction screens, weed screens,
and siphon tubes). Delaying treatment could perpetuate the problem by causing massing and
compacting of biomass. Heavy infestations and low flow may cause poor distribution resulting
in unsatisfactory control. Under these conditions repeated applications or increasing water
flow rate during application may be necessary.
Prior to treatment it is important to accurately determine water flow rates. In the absence of
weirs, orifices, or similar devices, which give accurate waterflow measurements, volume of
flow can be estimated by the following formula:
Cubic feet per second (cfs) = average width (feet) x average depth (feet) x average
velocity† (feet/second) x 0.9
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
†: The velocity can be estimated by determining the length of time it takes a floating
object to travel a defined distance. Divide the distance (feet) by the time (seconds) to
estimate velocity (feet/seconds). This measure should be repeated 3 times at the
intended application site and then used to calculate the average velocity.
After accurately determining the water flow rate in cfs or gallons/minute, find the corresponding
Captain rate in Table 2 or use the formula below.
cfs X desired concentration of metallic copper (ppm) = quarts/hour of application
TABLE 2
Application Rates for Flowing Water
Water Flow Rate Captain Drip Rate
PPM Copper
CFS Gal/min. Quart/ hr. mL / min.
1 450 0.2 - 1.0 0.2 - 1.0 3.2 - 15.7
2 900 0.2 - 1.0 0.4 - 2.0 6.3 - 31.5
3 1,350 0.2 - 1.0 0.6 - 3.0 9.5 - 47.3
4 1,800 0.2 - 1.0 0.8 - 4.0 12.6 - 63.0
5 2,250 0.2 - 1.0 1.0 - 5.0 15.8 - 78.5
10 4,500 0.2 - 1.0 2.0 - 10.0 31.5 - 157.7
100 45,000 0.2 - 1.0 20 - 100.0 315 - 1,577
Calculate the amount of Captain needed to maintain the drip rate for a treatment period of 3
hours by multiplying either:
Quarts / hr x 3; Milliliters / Minute x 180; or Fluid ounces / Minute x 180.
Rates will target 1.0 ppm copper concentration in the treated water for the treatment period.
Lower concentrations may be used on highly susceptible algae species or if longer
exposure/injection times are maintained. Introduction of Captain should be made in the
channel at weirs or other turbulence-creating structures to promote the dispersion of the
chemical. For injection periods longer than three hours, calculate the amount of Captain
needed by multiplying the rate by the desired time in minutes or hours, as appropriate.
Use a drum or tank equipped with a valve or other volume control device that can be calibrated
to maintain a constant drip rate. Use a stopwatch and appropriate measuring container to set
the desired drip rate. Readjust accordingly if the canal flow rate changes during the treatment
period. A small pump or other metering device may be used to meter Captain into the water
more accurately. Application can be made using diluted or undiluted material.
Results can vary depending upon species and density of algae and vegetation, desired
distance of control and flow rate, and impact of water quality on Captain and efficacy. Periodic
maintenance treatments may be required to maintain seasonal control (every 2 to 6 weeks). In
addition, Captain can be used in a rotational program with other herbicides labeled for flowing
water for an integrated management approach. SePRO recommends consulting a SePRO
Aquatic Specialist to determine optimal use rate, location of treatment stations and duration of
treatment period under local conditions.
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
Pulse Application Method
This method may only be used in constructed irrigation conveyance systems, laterals and
aqueducts. Do not use this method of application in locations with functioning potable water
intakes at or downstream from the application site.
For optimal control, apply as soon as algae begin active growth or interfere noticeably with
normal delivery of water. Heavy infestations and low flow may cause poor distribution resulting
in unsatisfactory control. Under these conditions repeated applications or increasing water
flow rate during application may be necessary. Maximum annual application rate of 13 lbs
metallic copper per year per 5 miles of conveyance per cubic foot per second (CSF). Apply
product into irrigation conveyance system or lateral at up to a maximum rate of 0.5 lbs metallic
copper (0.55 gallons of product) per cubic foot per second of water per 5 to 30-mile treatment
depending on water hardness, alkalinity and algae concentration. High water hardness or
alkalinity levels may require the use of higher rates within the rate range above to achieve
control. When velocity levels are higher (>1 foot per second) distance between drop stations
for pulse applications can be increased.
Chemigation System Application
Captain may be applied for the maintenance of chemigation systems. To control algae in
chemigation systems Captain should be applied continuously during water application. For
continuous addition application apply 0.91 - 9.1 gallons of Captain per 1,000,000 (one million)
gallons of water (0.3 - 3.0 gallons of Captain per acre-foot of water). This will produce a
concentration of 0.1 to 1.0 ppm of copper. Refer to Table 3 to determine the amounts of
Captain to use in chemigation systems. Do not exceed 1.0 ppm of copper or 0.91 gallons of
Captain per 100,000 gallons of water. For additional guidance regarding specific calibrations
or application techniques contact application equipment manufacturer, supplier, or pest control
advisor. It is not necessary to agitate or dilute Captain in the supply tank before application to
chemigation systems.
TABLE 3
Application Rates for Chemigation Systems
Amount of Captain
Copper Concentration
Per Acre-foot Per Million Gallons
(ppm)
Gallons Liters Gallons Liters
0.1 0.3 1.1 0.9 3.4
0.2 0.6 2.3 1.8 6.8
0.3 0.9 3.4 2.8 10.6
0.4 1.2 4.5 3.7 14.0
0.5 1.5 5.7 4.6 17.4
0.6 1.8 6.8 5.5 22.8
0.7 2.1 7.9 6.4 24.2
0.8 2.4 9.1 7.3 27.6
0.9 2.7 10.2 8.3 31.4
1.0 3.0 11.3 9.1 34.4
Chemigation System Application
(cid:120) Apply Captain only through sprinkler and drip irrigation systems including: center pivot,
lateral move, end tow, side (wheel) roll, traveler, big gun, solid set, or hand move; flood
(basin), furrow, border or drip (trickle) systems.
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
(cid:120) Crop injury, lack of effectiveness, or illegal pesticide residues in the crop can result from
non-uniform distribution of treated water.
(cid:120) If you have questions about calibration, contact your SePRO Aquatic Specialist, State
Extension Service, equipment manufacturer, or other experts.
(cid:120) Do not connect an irrigation system (including greenhouse systems) used for pesticide
application to a public water system unless the pesticide label-prescribed safety devices
for public water systems are in place (refer to the Chemigation Systems Connected to a
Public Water Supply section of this label).
(cid:120) A person knowledgeable of the chemigation system and responsible for its operation or
under the supervision of the responsible person, shall shut the system down and make
necessary adjustments should the need arise. The injection system should be
inspected, calibrated, and maintained before application of Captain begins.
Chemigation Systems Connected to a Public Water Supply
(cid:120) Public water system means a system for the provision to the public of piped water for
human consumption if such system has at least 15 service connections or regularly
serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out of the year.
(cid:120) Chemigation systems connected to public water systems must contain a functional,
reduced-pressure zone, back flow preventer (RPZ) or the functional equivalent in the
water supply line upstream from the point of pesticide introduction. There shall be a
complete physical break (air gap) between the flow outlet end of the fill pipe and the top
or overflow rim of the reservoir tank of at least twice the inside diameter of the fill pipe.
(cid:120) The pesticide injection pipeline must contain a functional, automatic, quick-closing
check valve to prevent the flow of fluid back toward the injection.
(cid:120) The pesticide injection pipeline must contain a functional, normally closed, solenoid-
operated valve located on the intake side of the injection pump and connected to the
system interlock to prevent fluid from being withdrawn from the supply tank when the
irrigation system is either automatically or manually shut down.
(cid:120) The system must contain functional interlocking controls to automatically shut off the
pesticide injection pump when the water pump motor stops or in cases where there is
no water pump, when the water pressure decreases to the point where pesticide
distribution is adversely affected.
(cid:120) Systems must use a metering pump, such as a positive displacement injection pump
(e.g., diaphragm pump) effectively designed and constructed of materials that are
compatible with pesticides and capable of being fitted with a system interlock.
(cid:120) Do not apply when wind speed favors drift beyond the area intended for treatment.
Sprinkler Chemigation Requirements
(cid:120) The system must contain a functional check valve, vacuum relief valve, and low
pressure drain appropriately located on the irrigation pipeline to prevent water source
contamination from back flow.
(cid:120) The pesticide injection pipeline must contain a functional, automatic, quick-closing
check valve to prevent the flow of fluid back toward the injection pump.
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
(cid:120) The pesticide injection pipeline must also contain a functional, normally closed,
solenoid-operated valve located on the intake side of the injection pump and connected
to the system interlock to prevent fluid from being withdrawn from the supply tank when
the irrigation system is either automatically or manually shut down.
(cid:120) The system must contain functional interlocking controls to automatically shut off the
pesticide injection pump when the water pump motor stops.
(cid:120) The irrigation line or water pump must include a functional pressure switch which will
stop the water pump motor when the water pressure decreases to the point where
pesticide distribution is adversely affected.
(cid:120) Systems must use a metering pump, such as a positive displacement injection pump
(e.g. diaphragm pump) effectively designed and constructed of materials that are
compatible with pesticides and capable of being fitted with a system interlock.
(cid:120) Do not apply when wind speed favors drift beyond the area intended for treatment.
Floor (Basin), Furrow and Border Chemigation Requirements
(cid:120) Systems using a gravity flow pesticide dispensing system must meter the pesticide into
the water at the head of the field and downstream of a hydraulic discontinuity such as a
drop structure or weir box to decrease potential for water source contamination from
back flow if water flow stops.
(cid:120) Systems utilizing a pressurized water and pesticide injection system must meet the
following requirements:
o The system must contain a functional check valve, vacuum relief valve, and low
pressure drain appropriately located on the irrigation pipeline to prevent water
source contamination from back flow.
o The pesticide injection pipeline must contain a functional, automatic, quick-closing
check valve to prevent the flow of fluid back toward the injection pump.
o The pesticide injection pipeline must also contain a functional, normally closed,
solenoid-operated valve located on the intake side of the injection pump and
connected to the system interlock to prevent fluid from being withdrawn from the
supply tank when the irrigation system is either automatically or manually shut down.
o The system must contain functional interlocking controls to automatically shut off the
pesticide injection pump when the water pump motor stops.
o The irrigation line or water pump must include a functional pressure switch which will
stop the water pump motor when the water pressure decreases to the point where
pesticide distribution is adversely affected.
o Systems must use a metering pump, such as a positive displacement injection pump
(e.g., diaphragm pump) effectively designed and constructed of materials that are
compatible with pesticides and capable of being fitted with a system interlock.
Drip (Trickle) Chemigation Requirements
(cid:120) The system must contain a functional check valve, vacuum relief valve, and low
pressure drain appropriately located on the irrigation pipeline to prevent water source
contamination from back flow.
(cid:120) The pesticide injection pipeline must contain a functional, automatic, quick-closing
check valve to prevent the flow of fluid back toward the injection pump.
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
(cid:120) The pesticide injection pipeline must also contain a functional, normally closed,
solenoid-operated valve located on the intake side of the injection pump and connected
to the system interlock to prevent fluid from being withdrawn from the supply tank when
the irrigation system is either automatically or manually shut down.
(cid:120) The system must contain functional interlocking controls to automatically shut off the
pesticide injection pump when the water pump motor stops.
(cid:120) The irrigation line or water pump must include a functional pressure switch which will
stop the water pump motor when the water pressure decreases to the point where
pesticide distribution is adversely affected.
(cid:120) Systems must use a metering pump, such as a positive displacement injection pump
(e.g.. diaphragm pump) effectively designed and constructed of materials that are
compatible with pesticides and capable of being fitted with a system interlock.
Tank Mixes
Captain may be mixed with other herbicides or algaecides registered for aquatic use provided
that no labeling prohibits such mixing. It can be tank mixed with other herbicides to improve
efficacy; and to control algae in areas where heavy algae growth may cover target submersed
plant species and interfere with herbicide exposure. Do not exceed any labeled rate or dose of
any of the products in the combination. It is the pesticide user’s responsibility to ensure that
all products are registered for the intended use. Read and follow the applicable restrictions
and limitations and directions for use on all product labels involved in tank mixing. Users must
follow the most restrictive directions for use and precautionary statements of each product in
the tank mixture. To ensure compatibility, a jar test is recommended before field application of
any tank mix combination. SePRO Corporation recommends consulting with a SePRO
Aquatic Specialist for latest tank mix recommendations.
Tank mixing or use of Captain with any other product which is not specifically listed on the
Captain label shall be at the exclusive risk of the user, applicator and/or application adviser, to
the extent allowed by applicable law.
Captain and Endothall
Captain may be applied as a tank mix or simultaneously injected or used with the
dipotassium salt of endothall (e.g. Cascade®) or the mono (N,N-dimethylalkylamine) salt of
endothall (e.g. Teton®) to broaden the weed control spectrum and/or reduce injection times
or rates in canals, ditches, and laterals. In flowing canals, apply Captain via drip or
injection at a rate of 0.1 to 1.0 ppm (See Table 2) in conjunction with Teton (0.05 – 2.0
ppm) or Cascade (0.35-3.0 ppm) for a minimum of one hour.
Hydrilla Control – Captain + Diquat Tank Mix
Captain can be mixed with diquat (diquat dibromide) in a 2:1 ration of Captain:Diquat (e.g.
4 gallons Captain and 2 gallons diquat [e.g. Littora®- 2 lbs a.i./gallon] per acre in waters
with average depth of 4 feet). Lower rates of Captain may also enhance the activity of
diquat. Captain should be applied at a minimum of 0.1 ppm in combination with diquat.
Higher rates may be needed in areas with dense weeds.
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
Spray Drift Management
Aerial Applications
(cid:120) Do not release spray at a height greater than 10 ft above the vegetative canopy or
water, unless a greater application height is necessary for pilot safety.
(cid:120) Applicators are required to use a medium or coarser droplet size (ASABE S572.1).
(cid:120) Do not apply when wind speed exceeds 15 mph at the application site. If the windspeed
is greater than 10 mph, the boom length must be 65% or less of the wingspan for fixed
wing aircraft and 75% or less of the rotor diameter for helicopters. Otherwise, the boom
length must be 75% or less of the wingspan for fixed-wing aircraft and 90% or less of
the rotor diameter for helicopters.
(cid:120) Applicators must use ½ swath displacement upwind at the downwind edge of the
application area.
(cid:120) Do not apply during temperature inversions.
Ground Boom Applications
(cid:120) Apply with the spray release height recommended by the manufacturer, but no more
than 4 feet above the water surface.
(cid:120) Applicators are required to use a medium or coarser droplet size (ASABE S572.1).
(cid:120) Do not apply when wind speeds exceed 15 miles per hour at the application site.
(cid:120) Do not apply during temperature inversions.
Spray Drift Advisories
The applicator is responsible for avoiding off-site spray drift. Be aware of nearby non-
target sites and environmental conditions.
Importance of Droplet Size
An effective way to reduce spray drift is to apply large droplets. Use the largest droplets
that provide target pest control. While applying larger droplets will reduce spray drift, the
potential for drift will be greater if applications are made improperly or under unfavorable
environmental conditions.
Controlling Droplet Size – Ground Boom
(cid:120) Volume - Increasing the spray volume so that larger droplets are produced will reduce
spray drift. Use the highest practical spray volume for the application. If a greater spray
volume is needed, consider using a nozzle with a higher flow rate.
(cid:120) Pressure - Use the lowest spray pressure recommended for the nozzle to produce the
target spray volume and droplet size.
(cid:120) Spray Nozzle - Use a spray nozzle that is designed for the intended application.
Consider using nozzles designed to reduce drift.
Controlling Droplet Size – Aircraft
(cid:120) Adjust Nozzles - Follow nozzle manufacturers recommendations for setting up nozzles.
Generally, to reduce fine droplets, nozzles should be oriented parallel with the airflow in
flight.
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
Boom Height – Ground Boom
Use the lowest boom height that is compatible with the spray nozzles that will provide
uniform coverage. For ground equipment, the boom should remain level with the crop and
have minimal bounce.
Release Height - Aircraft
Higher release heights increase the potential for spray drift. When applying aerially to
crops, do not release spray at a height greater than 10 ft above the crop canopy, unless a
greater application height is necessary for pilot safety.
Shielded Sprayers
Shielding the boom or individual nozzles can reduce spray drift. Consider using shielded
sprayers. Verify that the shields are not interfering with the uniform deposition of the spray
on the target area.
Temperature and Humidity
When making applications in hot and dry conditions, use larger droplets to reduce effects of
evaporation.
Temperature Inversions
Drift potential is high during a temperature inversion. Temperature inversions are
characterized by increasing temperature with altitude and are common on nights with
limited cloud cover and light to no wind. The presence of an inversion can be indicated by
ground fog or by the movement of smoke from a ground source or an aircraft smoke
generator. Smoke that layers and moves laterally in a concentrated cloud (under low wind
conditions) indicates an inversion, while smoke that moves upward and rapidly dissipates
indicates good vertical air mixing. Avoid applications during temperature inversions.
Wind
Drift potential generally increases with wind speed. AVOID APPLICATIONS DURING
GUSTY WIND CONDITIONS.
Applicators need to be familiar with local wind patterns and terrain that could affect spray
drift.
STORAGE AND DISPOSAL
Do not contaminate water, food, or feed by storage and disposal.
Pesticide Storage: Store in a cool dry place. Do not store near feed or foodstuffs. In case of
leak or spill, use absorbent materials to contain liquids and dispose in a manner consistent
with the pesticide disposal instructions.
Pesticide Disposal: Pesticide wastes are acutely hazardous. Improper disposal of excess
pesticide, spray mixture, or rinsate is a violation of Federal Law. If these wastes cannot be
disposed of by use according to label instructions, contact your State Pesticide or
Environmental Control Agency, or the Hazardous Waste representative at the nearest EPA
Regional Office for guidance. Wastes resulting from the use of this product may be disposed
of on site or at an approved waste disposal facility.
Container Handling
Nonrefillable Container. DO NOT reuse or refill this container. Triple rinse or pressure
rinse container (or equivalent) promptly after emptying; then offer for recycling, if available, or
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
reconditioning, if appropriate, or puncture and dispose of in a sanitary landfill, or by
incineration, or by other procedures approved by state and local authorities.
Triple rinse containers small enough to shake (capacity ≤ 5 gallons) as follows: Empty
the remaining contents into application equipment or a mix tank and drain for 10 seconds after
the flow begins to drip. Fill the container ¼ full with water and recap. Shake for 10 seconds.
Pour rinsate into application equipment or a mix tank, or store rinsate for later use or disposal.
Drain for 10 seconds after the flow begins to drip. Repeat this procedure two more times.
Triple rinse containers too large to shake (capacity >5 gallons) as follows: Empty the
remaining contents into application equipment or a mix tank. Fill the container ¼ full with water.
Replace and tighten closures. Tip container on its side and roll it back and forth, ensuring at
least one complete revolution, for 30 seconds. Stand the container on its end and tip it back
and forth several times. Turn the container over onto its other end and tip it back and forth
several times. Empty the rinsate into application equipment or a mix tank, or store rinsate for
later use or disposal. Repeat this procedure two more times.
Pressure rinse as follows: Empty the remaining contents into application equipment or mix
tank and continue to drain for 10 seconds after the flow begins to drip. Hold container upside
down over application equipment or mix tank, or collect rinsate for later use or disposal. Insert
pressure rinsing nozzle in the side of the container and rinse at about 40 PSI for at least 30
seconds. Drain for 10 seconds after the flow begins to drip.
Refillable Container. Refill this container with pesticide only. DO NOT reuse this container for
any other purpose. Triple rinsing the container before final disposal is the responsibility of the
person disposing of the container. Cleaning before refilling is the responsibility of the refiller.
Triple rinse as follows: To clean the container before final disposal, empty the remaining
contents from this container into application equipment or mix tank. Fill the container about
10% full with water. Agitate vigorously or recirculate water with the pump for 2 minutes. Pour
or pump rinsate into application equipment or rinsate collection system. Repeat this rinsing
procedure two more times.
When this container is empty, replace the cap and seal all openings that have been opened
during use; return the container to the point of purchase or to a designated location. This
container must only be refilled with a pesticide product. Prior to refilling, inspect carefully for
damage such as cracks, punctures, abrasions, worn-out threads and closure devices. Check
for leaks after refilling and before transport. DO NOT transport if this container is damaged or
leaking. If the container is damaged, or leaking, or obsolete and not returned to the point of
purchase or to a designated location, triple rinse emptied container and offer for recycling, if
available, or dispose of container in compliance with state and local regulations.
Warranty Disclaimer: SePRO Corporation warrants that this product conforms to the
chemical description on the product label. Testing and research have also determined that this
product is reasonably fit for the uses described on the product label. To the extent consistent
with applicable law, SePRO Corporation makes no other express or implied warranty of fitness
or merchantability nor any other express or implied warranty and any such warranties are
expressly disclaimed.
Misuse: Federal law prohibits the use of this product in a manner inconsistent with its label
directions. To the extent consistent with applicable law, the buyer assumes responsibility for
any adverse consequences if this product is not used according to its label directions. In no
case shall SePRO Corporation be liable for any losses or damages resulting from the use,
handling or application of this product in a manner inconsistent with its label.
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
For additional important labeling information regarding SePRO Corporation’s Terms and
Conditions of Use, Inherent Risks of Use and Limitation of Remedies, please visit
http://seprolabels.com/terms or scan the image below.
©Copyright ____ SePRO Corporation
Captain and Littora are registered trademarks of SePRO Corporation.
Cascade® and Teton® are registered trademarks of United Phosphorus, Inc.
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
[Base label for ALL containers]
NOT
COPPER GROUP HERBICIDE
CLASSIFIED
Captain®
LIQUID COPPER ALGAECIDE
Active Ingredient
Copper Ethanolamine Complex† (Mixed CAS#'s 82027-59-6 & 14215-52-2) ............ 28.2%
Other Ingredients ....................................................................................................7 1.8%
TOTAL ....................................................................................................................1 00.0%
†Metallic copper equivalent = 9.1%
KEEP OUT OF REACH OF CHILDREN
DANGER/PELIGRO
Si usted no entiende la etiqueta, busque a alguien para que se la explique a usted en detalle.
(If you do not understand the label, find someone to explain it to you in detail.)
FIRST AID
If in eyes (cid:120) Hold eye open and rinse slowly and gently with water for 15 - 20 minutes.
(cid:120) Remove contact lenses, if present, after the first 5 minutes, then continue
rinsing eye.
(cid:120) Call a poison control center or doctor for treatment advice.
If on skin or (cid:120) Take off contaminated clothing.
clothing (cid:120) Rinse skin immediately with plenty of water for 15 - 20 minutes.
(cid:120) Call a poison control center or doctor for treatment advice.
If swallowed (cid:120) Call a poison control center or doctor immediately for treatment advice.
(cid:120) Have person sip a glass of water if able to swallow.
(cid:120) Do not induce vomiting unless told to do so by a poison control center or
doctor.
(cid:120) Do not give anything by mouth to an unconscious person.
If inhaled (cid:120) Move person to fresh air.
(cid:120) If person is not breathing, call 911 or an ambulance, then give artificial
respiration, preferably mouth-to-mouth if possible.
(cid:120) Call a poison control center or doctor for further treatment advice.
HOTLINE NUMBER
Have the product container or label with you when calling a poison control center or doctor, or
going for treatment. In case of emergency endangering health or the environment involving
this product, call INFOTRAC at 1-800-535-5053.
NOTE TO PHYSICIAN: Probable mucosal damage may contraindicate the use of gastric
lavage.
PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS
Hazards to Humans and Domestic Animals
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
Danger. Corrosive. Causes irreversible eye damage. Causes skin irritation. Harmful if
swallowed. Harmful if absorbed through skin. Harmful if inhaled. Do not get in eyes,
on skin, or on clothing. Avoid breathing mist or spray vapor. When handling, wear
protective eyewear, clothing, and chemical-resistant gloves as described under the
section of this label pertaining to Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). Wash skin
thoroughly with soap and water after handling and before eating, drinking, chewing
gum, or using tobacco. Remove and wash contaminated clothing before reuse.
STORAGE AND DISPOSAL
Do not contaminate water, food, or feed by storage and disposal.
Pesticide Storage: Store in a cool dry place. Do not store near feed or foodstuffs. In case of
leak or spill, use absorbent materials to contain liquids and dispose in a manner consistent
with the pesticide disposal instructions.
Pesticide Disposal: Pesticide wastes are acutely hazardous. Improper disposal of excess
pesticide, spray mixture, or rinsate is a violation of Federal Law. If these wastes cannot be
disposed of by use according to label instructions, contact your State Pesticide or
Environmental Control Agency, or the Hazardous Waste representative at the nearest EPA
Regional Office for guidance. Wastes resulting from the use of this product may be disposed
of on site or at an approved waste disposal facility.
Nonrefillable Container Handling: Do not reuse or refill this container. Triple rinse container
(or equivalent) promptly after emptying. Then offer for recycling (if available) or reconditioning,
or puncture and dispose of in a sanitary landfill, or by incineration, or by other procedures
approved by state and local authorities.
Refillable Container Handling: Refill this container with pesticide only. Do not reuse this
container for any other purpose. Cleaning the container before final disposal is the
responsibility of the person disposing of the container. Cleaning before refilling is the
responsibility of the refiller.
See attached booklet for complete container handling directions including triple rinsing
and pressure rinsing instructions.
Refer to label booklet for additional Precautionary Information and Directions for Use.
Notice: Read the entire label before using. Use only according to label directions. Before
buying or using this product, read Warranty Disclaimer and Misuse statements in label
booklet. If terms are unacceptable, return at once, unopened.
EPA Reg. No. 67690-9 EPA Est. No. _______________
FPL20220308 [P/N]__________
SePRO Corporation • 11550 N. Meridian Street, Suite 600 • Carmel, IN 46032, U.S.A.
Net contents _______ (Non-refillable)
Captain®, EPA Reg No 67690-9
[Text accessed through the weblink / QR code. This is NOT part of the printed label]
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF USE
If terms of the Warranty Disclaimer and Misuse provisions on the product label as well as
the Inherent Risks of Use and Limitation of Remedies statements below are not acceptable,
return unopened package at once to the seller for a full refund of purchase price paid.
Otherwise, to the extent consistent with applicable law, use by the buyer or any other user
constitutes acceptance of the terms under Warranty Disclaimer, Misuse, Inherent Risks of
Use, and Limitation of Remedies.
INHERENT RISKS OF USE
It is impossible to eliminate all risks associated with use of this product. Plant injury, lack of
performance, or other unintended consequences may result because of such factors as use of
the product contrary to label instructions (including use under conditions noted on the label
such as unfavorable temperatures, soil conditions, etc.), abnormal conditions (such as
excessive rainfall, drought, tornadoes, hurricanes), the presence of other materials, the
manner of application, or other factors, all of which are beyond the control of SePRO
Corporation or the seller. To the extent consistent with applicable law, all such risks shall be
assumed by the buyer and/or user of the product.
LIMITATION OF REMEDIES
To the extent consistent with applicable law, the exclusive remedy for losses or damages
resulting from this product (including claims based on contract, negligence, strict liability, or
other legal theories) shall be limited to, at SePRO Corporation's election, one of the following:
1. Refund of purchase price paid by buyer or user for product bought, or
2. Replacement of amount of product used.
To the extent consistent with applicable law, SePRO Corporation shall not be liable for losses
or damages resulting from handling or use of this product unless SePRO Corporation is
promptly notified of such losses or damages in writing. In no case shall SePRO Corporation be
liable for consequential or incidental damages or losses.
The terms of the Warranty Disclaimer and Misuse provisions on the product label and
these Terms and Conditions of Use, Inherent Risks of Use and Limitation of Remedies cannot
be varied by any written or verbal statements or agreements. No employee or sales agent of
SePRO Corporation or the seller is authorized to vary or exceed the terms of the Warranty
Disclaimer and Misuse provisions on the product label and these Terms and Conditions of
Use, Inherent Risks of Use and Limitation of Remedies in any manner.