Office of Water EPA 820-S-13-001
MC 4304T May 2013
Impacts of Climate Change on the Occurrence of
Harmful Algal Blooms
SSuummmmaarryy
BBaacckkggrroouunndd
Climate change is predicted to change many
Algae occur naturally in marine and fresh waters.
environmental conditions that could affect the
Under favorable conditions that include adequate
natural properties of fresh and marine waters both in
light availability, warm waters, and high nutrient
the US and worldwide. Changes in these factors
levels, algae can rapidly grow and multiply causing
could favor the growth of harmful algal blooms and
“blooms.” Blooms of algae can cause damage to
habitat changes such that marine HABs can invade
aquatic environments by blocking sunlight and
and occur in freshwater. An increase in the
depleting oxygen required by other aquatic
occurrence and intensity of harmful algal blooms
organisms, restricting their growth and survival.
may negatively impact the environment, human
Some species of algae, including golden and red
health, and the economy for communities across the
algae and certain types of cyanobacteria, can produce
US and around the world. The purpose of this fact
potent toxins that can cause adverse health effects to
sheet is to provide climate change researchers and
wildlife and humans, such as damage to the liver and
decision–makers a summary of the potential impacts
nervous system. When algal blooms impair aquatic
of climate change on harmful algal blooms in
ecosystems or have the potential to affect human
freshwater and marine ecosystems. Although much
health, they are known as harmful algal blooms
of the evidence presented in this fact sheet suggests
(HABs).
that the problem of harmful algal blooms may
worsen under future climate scenarios, further
In recent decades, scientists have observed an
research is needed to better understand the
increase in the frequency, severity and geographic
association between climate change and harmful
distribution of HABs worldwide. Recent research
algae.
suggests that the impacts of climate change may
promote the growth and dominance of harmful algal
blooms through a variety of mechanisms including:
• Warmer water temperatures
• Changes in salinity
• Increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentrations
• Changes in rainfall patterns
• Intensifying of coastal upwelling
• Sea level rise
TTeemmppeerraattuurree
Harmful algae typically bloom during the warm
summer season or when water temperatures are
warmer than usual. As temperatures become warmer
due to climate change, the growth of harmful algae
may be favored over other non-harmful algae
through a combination of mechanisms:
Warmer temperatures create a competitive
Microcystis bloom in Lake Neatahwanta, NY,
advantage for certain types of harmful algae.
August, 2010. Courtesy of James Hyde, NYS DOH.
As seen with the toxin-producing cyanobacteria
Microcystis, certain harmful algae grow faster
than other non-harmful algae at relatively high Harmful algal blooms themselves increase water
temperatures, some of them at temperatures above temperature, further favoring their growth.
77°F. This competitive advantage increases the Harmful algal blooms absorb light from the sun
likelihood of HAB events. which increases the temperature of surface water.
This positive feedback mechanism further favors
Warmer temperatures increase thermal the growth of harmful algal blooms and promotes
stratification, favoring the growth of some harmful their competitive advantage in aquatic
algae. ecosystems.
The density of water is strongly influenced by
temperature and varies with depth in the water
column. Surface waters are usually warmer and less SSaalliinniittyy
dense compared to bottom waters that are usually
Climate change may cause summer droughts to
colder and denser. During summer months, warming
increase in intensity and duration worldwide. During
of surface waters can create a physical force strong
a drought, the amount of water flowing into lakes
enough to resist the wind’s ability to mix the water.
and reservoirs decreases. Combined with warmer
These layers can restrict the vertical movement of
temperatures that cause more evaporation, water
oxygen and nutrients in water. This process is known
levels of fresh water bodies decrease. This causes the
as thermal stratification.
salinity, or concentration of salt in the water body, to
increase. Although certain toxin-producing
The warming of surface waters increases the
cyanobacteria are quite salt tolerant, temporary
frequency, strength, and duration of stratification,
increases in salinity can also cause salt stress leading
which favors the growth of harmful algal blooms.
to leakage of cells and the release of toxins. Increases
Cyanobacteria and dinoflagellates have the ability to
in salinity during drought conditions can also create
control their depth in water. In stratified waters, these
favorable conditions for the invasion of marine algae
algae can float or swim upwards to form dense surface
into what are usually freshwater ecosystems. This is
blooms that block the sunlight for other algae and
currently occurring in our southwestern and south
aquatic organisms that live in deeper layers and are
central US lakes where marine alga, Prymnesium
unable to migrate to the surface. Under stratified
parvum, or golden algae, has been increasing since
conditions, these algae may also encounter less
2000, causing significant fish kills in inland waters.
competition for nutrients in surface water, increasing
their competitive advantage. Most bloom-forming
cyanobacteria can form gas vesicles, regulating their
CCaarrbboonn DDiiooxxiiddee
vertical position and migrating up and down to obtain
nutrients from deeper waters while returning to the All algae, including harmful species, require carbon
surface as blooms. dioxide (CO 2 ) for photosynthesis. Increases in
atmospheric carbon dioxide will increase the levels
Warmer temperatures decrease the viscosity of water, of dissolved carbon dioxide in marine and freshwater
favoring the growth of harmful algal blooms. ecosystems, favoring those algae that can grow
Viscosity is a description of the thickness of fluids. faster in elevated dissolved carbon dioxide
Fluids that have a higher viscosity like honey, are conditions. In addition, cyanobacteria that can float
thicker, and therefore do not flow as easily as liquids to the surface have a distinct advantage over other
with a lower viscosity, such as water. competing algae because they can directly utilize
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. As atmospheric
Warmer temperatures reduce the viscosity of water, carbon dioxide concentrations increase due to human
which increases the speed at which small aquatic activities such as the burning of fossil fuels and
organisms can vertically migrate. This makes it easier deforestation, cyanobacteria that can float to the
for small cyanobacteria to float to the surface to form surface will have greater access to carbon dioxide for
harmful algal blooms. On the other hand, a decrease growth, increasing the occurrence of harmful algal
in viscosity promotes the sinking of larger algae and blooms.
organisms that are not capable of migrating towards This also could lead to changes in the chemistry of
the surface. This may increase the competitive ambient waters. Higher photosynthesis converts
advantage of cyanobacteria over other algae. carbon dioxide into living algal biomass, some of
which dies and settles to the bottom. The eventual
decomposition of this surplus organic material is
analogous to our own breathing activity because it US, upwelling may intensify and deliver more
consumes oxygen and increases carbon dioxide in nutrients to coastal waters, favoring the growth of
areas with poor circulation. This can contribute to both harmful algal blooms and benign species.
increases in acidity (i.e., lower pH). This ecological
source of acidification is added to the direct
acidifying effects of atmospheric carbon dioxide,
FFoorr MMoorree IInnffoorrmmaattiioonn
commonly known as ocean acidification. Like
temperature, these changes in water chemistry can For more information on water and climate change,
change the competitive relationships between HABs visit http://water.epa.gov/scitech/climatechange/.
and other algae, and can also change the ability of To learn more about harmful algal blooms, go to:
zooplankton to control HABs through their grazing http://go.usa.gov/gYTH
activity.
AAcckknnoowwlleeddggeemmeennttss
RRaaiinnffaallll
EPA gratefully acknowledges the valuable
Future climate projections suggest an increase in contributions from Christopher Sibrizzi, George
extreme weather events. For example, the incidence Washington University, and Dr. Stephanie Moore,
of intense storms causing rainfall to occur in more Northwest Fisheries Science Center, West Coast
concentrated bursts followed by long dry periods of Center for Oceans and Human Health, NOAA, in
drought may increase. Extreme rainfall could developing this work.
increase the transport of nutrients from land into
water bodies via runoff. If followed by drought
conditions as is projected, water bodies may retain
those nutrients for longer periods of time, which
increases the potential for HAB development.
SSeeaa LLeevveell RRiissee
Scientific models predict that sea level could rise
from 18 cm up to one meter by the year 2100. This
would increase the extent of continental shelf areas,
providing shallow, stable coastal waters that may
favor the growth of harmful algae and/or expand
their habitat inland.
CCooaassttaall UUppwweelllliinngg
Coastal upwelling is a naturally occurring process, in
which alongshore winds move coastal surface water
offshore which is replaced by deep water that moves
along the ocean floor towards the coast. This
“upwelled” water brings nutrients from the ocean
floor to the surface leading to high productivity.
Harmful algal blooms’ growth in upwelling systems
vary due to atmospheric oscillations (upwelling or
downwelling by interannual fluctuations), and is
subject to water-column stratification, nutrient
availability, and the intensity and persistence of
upwelling conditions. Global climate change may
alter the timing and intensity of coastal upwelling.
Along ocean boundaries, such as the west coast of the