Water Treatment Optimization for
Cyanotoxins
Version 1.0
Office of Water (MS-140) EPA 810-B-16-007 October 2016
Disclaimer
The Standards and Risk Management Division of the Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water of the
U.S. EPA has reviewed and approved this document for publication. This document does not impose
legally binding requirements on any party. The information in this document is intended solely to
recommend or suggest and does not imply any requirements. Neither the United States Government
nor any of its employees, contractors or their employees make any warranty, expressed or implied, or
assumes any legal liability or responsibility for any third party’s use of any information, product or
process discussed in this document, or represents that its use by such party would not infringe on
privately owned rights. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute
endorsement or recommendation for use.
The intent of this document is to provide treatment considerations for water treatment plant managers,
supervisors, and operators faced with harmful algal blooms in their source water. The approaches
presented in this document are not intended to be mandates or directive to any entities.
The science on water treatment optimization for cyanotoxins is still evolving. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) will update this document as more research and information become
available. EPA certainly welcomes comments and feedback on the content of this document.
The focus of this document is on water treatment optimization for cyanotoxins. Future versions of this
document may include additional information or resources on source water protection as a strategy for
preventing cyanotoxins in drinking water sources.
For purposes of this document, the term “Harmful Algal Blooms” (HABs) refers to cyanobacteria
(sometimes called “blue-green algae”) blooms with the potential of producing cyanotoxins. U.S. EPA
recognizes that alternative descriptors (e.g., Harmful Cyanobacteria Blooms [HCBs], cyanoHABs,
cyanobacteria HABs [CHABs]) have been used elsewhere but considers “HABs” a widely used and
recognized term. U.S. EPA may substitute an alternative term in future updates to this document if
consensus builds around such an alternative.
Questions concerning this document should be addressed to the following contacts:
Thomas Waters, P.E.
U.S. EPA OGWDW, SRMD, Technical Support Center
26 West Martin Luther King Drive, Mail Code 140, Cincinnati, OH 45268
(513) 569-7611, Waters.Tom@epa.gov
or
Alison Dugan, P.E.
U.S. EPA OGWDW, SRMD, Technical Support Center
26 West Martin Luther King Drive, Mail Code 140, Cincinnati, OH 45268
(513) 569-7122, Dugan.Alison@epa.gov
i
Acknowledgements
The document was developed by the U.S. EPA Standards and Risk Management Division, Technical
Support Center (SRMD, TSC), with additional support from the U.S. EPA Office of Research and
Development (ORD).
• Thomas Waters, U.S. EPA, SRMD, TSC
• Alison Dugan, U.S. EPA, SRMD, TSC
• Richard Lieberman, U.S. EPA, SRMD, TSC
• Thomas Speth, U.S. EPA ORD
• Gregory Carroll, U.S. EPA, SRMD, TSC
Review and comment of this document was provided by the following individuals:
• Matthew Alexander, U.S. EPA, SRMD, TSC
• Steven Wendelken, U.S. EPA, SRMD, TSC
• Glynda Smith, U.S. EPA, SRMD, TSC
• William Adams, U.S. EPA, SRMD, TSC
• Sandhya Parshionikar, U.S. EPA, SRMD, TSC
• Carrie Miller, U.S. EPA, SRMD, TSC
• James Sinclair, U.S. EPA, SRMD, TSC
• Nicholas Dugan, U.S. EPA, ORD
• Ryan Albert, U.S. EPA, SRMD, Standards and Risk Reduction Branch (SRRB)
• Hannah Holsinger, U.S. EPA, SRMD, SRRB
• Katherine Foreman, U.S. EPA, SRMD, SRRB
• Kenneth Rotert, U.S. EPA, SRMD, SRRB
• Lesley D’Anglada, U.S. EPA, Office of Science and Technology (OST)
• Phil Oshida, U.S. EPA, SRMD
• Larry DeMers, Process Applications, Inc.
• Bill Davis, Process Applications, Inc.
• James Taft, Association of State Drinking Water Administrators
• Darrell Osterhoudt, Association of State Drinking Water Administrators
• Casey Lyon, Oregon Health Authority
• Amy Little, California State Water Resources Control Board
• Lloyd Wilson, New York State Department of Health
• James Hyde, New York State Department of Health
• Kristin Divris, Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
• Heather Raymond, Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
• Maria Lucente, Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
• Adam Carpenter, American Water Works Association (AWWA)
• G. Tracey Mehan, AWWA
• Steve Via, AWWA
• Kevin Linder, City of Aurora, Colorado
• Michael Barsotti, Champlain Water District, Vermont
• Djanette Khiari, Water Research Foundation
ii
Table of Contents
Abbreviations ............................................................................................................................................... v
Section 1: Background and Introduction ..................................................................................................... 1
Figure 1-1. Multiple barrier concept for water treatment optimization .................................................. 2
Section 2: Understanding source water to anticipate treatment needs .................................................... 3
2.1 Ambient source water conditions that favor cyanobacteria proliferation ......................................... 3
Table 2-1. Water quality conditions favorable for cyanobacteria proliferation ................................... 4
2.2 Bloom identification, confirmation, and quantification in source water ........................................... 4
2.2.1 Indirect cyanobacteria screening methods .................................................................................. 4
Table 2-2. Source water quality indicators ........................................................................................... 5
2.2.2 Direct cyanobacteria measurement methods ............................................................................. 6
2.3 Cyanotoxin measurement ................................................................................................................... 7
2.3.1 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) ............................................................................. 7
Table 2-3. Advantages and disadvantages of ELISA for cyanotoxin monitoring ................................... 8
2.3.2 Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) ...................................... 9
Table 2-4. Advantages and Disadvantages of LC/MS/MS for cyanotoxin monitoring .......................... 9
2.3.3 Cyanotoxin toxicity measurement ............................................................................................. 10
2.4 Source water considerations and associated short-term management strategies .......................... 10
2.5 Long-term strategies to prevent or mitigate cyanobacteria blooms in source water ...................... 11
Section 3: Treatment options based on source water quality .................................................................. 13
Figure 3-1. Water treatment decision-tree for cyanotoxins detected in source water. ........................ 14
3.1 Treatment considerations for intracellular cyanotoxins .................................................................. 15
Figure 3-2. Intracellular cyanotoxin treatment considerations .............................................................. 16
3.2 Treatment considerations for extracellular cyanotoxins .................................................................. 18
Figure 3-3. Extracellular cyanotoxin treatment considerations ............................................................. 19
3.2.1 Carbon adsorption ..................................................................................................................... 20
3.2.2 Membranes ................................................................................................................................ 22
3.2.3 Biofiltration ................................................................................................................................ 22
3.2.4 Oxidation .................................................................................................................................... 23
Table 3-1. General effectiveness of cyanotoxin oxidation with common water treatment oxidants 24
Table 3-2. Microcystin-LR CT table...................................................................................................... 25
Table 3-3. Cylindrospermopsin CT table ............................................................................................. 26
Section 4: Implementing an optimization approach ................................................................................. 27
iii
Section 5: Conclusions ................................................................................................................................ 28
References .................................................................................................................................................. 29
Glossary ...................................................................................................................................................... 34
Appendix A: Process evaluation for treatment of intracellular toxins ................................................... A-1
Table A-1. Conventional treatment facility ........................................................................................... A-1
Table A-2. Membrane treatment process ............................................................................................ A-7
Appendix B: Process evaluation for treatment of extracellular toxins ................................................... B-1
Table B-1. Powdered activated carbon (PAC) ........................................................................................ B-1
Table B-2: Granular activated carbon (GAC) .......................................................................................... B-5
Table B-3: High-pressure membranes (reverse osmosis [RO] and nanofiltration [NF]) ........................ B-7
Table B-4: Oxidation: Can my facility use oxidation to treat extracellular cyanotoxins? ...................... B-9
iv
Abbreviations
ADDA 3-amino-9-methoxy-2,6,8-trimethyl-10-phenyldeca-4,6-dienoic acid. An amino acid that
is part of the microcystin molecule and is common to a majority of microcystin
congeners.
AMWA Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies
ASDWA Association of State Drinking Water Agencies
AWOP Area-Wide Optimization Program
AWWA American Water Works Association
CCP Composite Correction Program
CO2 Carbon dioxide
DBP Disinfection by-product
DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid
EBCT Empty-bed contact time
ELISA Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
GAC Granular activated carbon
HAA5 Haloacetic acids (5 regulated compounds)
HAB Harmful algal bloom
HESD Health effects support document
IFE Individual filter effluent
LC/MS/MS Liquid chromatography / tandem mass spectrometry
MF Microfiltration
MRDL Maximum residual disinfectant level
NAWC National Association of Water Companies
NF Nanofiltration
NOM Natural organic matter
NTU Nephelometric turbidity unit. A measure of turbidity.
PAC Powdered activated carbon
PWS Public water system
RO Reverse osmosis
RSSCT Rapid small-scale column test
TOC Total organic carbon
TTHM Total trihalomethane
T&O Taste and odor
UF Ultrafiltration
USEPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
UV Ultraviolet (light), typically used in water treatment as an oxidant
WRF Water Research Foundation
v
Section 1: Background and Introduction
Increasing occurrence and detection of harmful algal blooms (HABs), sometimes referred to as blue-
green algae or cyanobacteria blooms, in drinking water sources pose a variety of challenges to water
treatment plant managers and operators. In addition to taste and odor issues that may be associated
with algal blooms, HABs sometimes produce cyanotoxins, to which human exposure can result in a host
of adverse health effects, including gastroenteritis, and damage to the liver, kidneys, or nervous system
(U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2015a-f).
In June 2015, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency released Health Advisories for two specific
cyanotoxins – total microcystins and cylindrospermopsin – and Health Effects Support Documents
(HESDs) for three specific cyanotoxins – total microcystins, cylindrospermopsin, and anatoxin-a. At the
time of release, there was not sufficient information to develop a Health Advisory for anatoxin-a (U.S.
EPA, 2015a,b,d-f). The Health Advisories include information on health effects, analytical methods and
water treatment. The HESDs provide a comprehensive review of published literature on physical and
chemical properties, environmental fate, known occurrence information, and health effects.
Additionally, EPA released a supporting document titled “Recommendations for Public Water Systems to
Prepare for and Respond to Cyanotoxins in Drinking Water” (U.S. EPA, 2015c). That “Recommendations”
document is intended to assist public drinking water systems (PWSs) in managing the risks from
cyanotoxins in drinking water. It includes information for evaluating source waters for vulnerability to
contamination by cyanotoxins and describes a framework for managing risks to cyanotoxins that PWSs
can consider in determining their risk management efforts. Appendix E of the “Recommendations”
document also contains information on long-term mitigation strategies and treatment options (U.S. EPA,
2015c).
The American Water Works Association (AWWA) and the Water Research Foundation (WRF) have also
released “A Water Utility Manager’s Guide to Cyanotoxins.” That guide provides a brief overview of
current knowledge surrounding common questions utility managers may have, to help them better
prepare for cyanotoxins and to respond when cyanotoxins cause water quality problems (AWWA, 2015).
WRF, in conjunction with Water Research Australia, released a report titled “Optimizing Conventional
Treatment for the Removal of Cyanobacteria and Toxins” that provides detailed guidance to water
utilities on the optimization of conventional treatment practices (including coagulation, clarification, and
filtration) for the removal of cyanobacteria and their toxins while meeting all other water quality goals
associated with drinking water production (Newcombe, et al., 2015).
The purpose of this document is to assist PWS managers and operators (as well as technical assistance
providers working with PWS personnel) with preparing for, and responding to, the treatment challenges
that often arise during HAB events and introduce principles that can be used to achieve optimization
goals using a compilation of published approaches and strategies. This document complements the
USEPA Health Advisories for total microcystins and cylindrospermopsin and the “Recommendations”
document.
For the purposes of this document, treatment optimization is defined as achieving the best performance
possible from each unit process in a water treatment plant by applying process control techniques and
1
problem-solving skills (e.g., priority setting, tailored studies, and data trending), while continuously
assessing unit process performance relative to pre-established goals. In support of this, water plant
operators should consider routinely monitoring water quality from each unit process, as well as raw and
finished water quality. Operators can analyze trends from the monitoring data to assess system
performance and the impact of process controls relative to optimization goals. As presented in EPA’s
Composite Correction Program (CCP) (U.S. EPA, 2004), the primary approach to optimization for
protection from waterborne disease and removal of contaminants is the “multiple-barrier” concept,
which currently includes treatment and distribution system barriers. This is shown below in Figure 1-1. A
commonly used performance indicator for waterborne pathogens is particulate removal as measured by
turbidity. The CCP has established turbidity goals for sedimentation and filtration.
Figure 1-1. Multiple barrier concept for water treatment optimization
EPA’s CCP handbook presents the concept of a “capable plant” with respect to microbial (turbidity-
based) water treatment optimization (U.S. EPA, 2004). A water treatment plant capable of optimization
not only relies on good design, but also has supportive administration/management and is well
operated and maintained. In this vein, the CCP outlines a series of performance-limiting factors in each
of these categories (administration, design, operation, and maintenance), which can impact a system’s
ability to remove pathogens1.
Specific, generally accepted in-plant cyanobacteria and cyanotoxin targets (i.e. goals) have yet to be
established to formally define optimization for these parameters. This document represents a step
toward that objective. Jar testing, for example, is commonly used to optimize particulate removal (which
could include cyanobacteria cells) in water treatment plants. However, current research suggests that
under certain conditions, turbidity, which is a common optimization parameter for jar testing, may not
be a good indicator of cyanobacteria cell or toxin removal (Newcombe, et al., 2015), and that alternative
water quality parameters, such as pigments chlorophyll-a and phycocyanin (fluorescence), UV254
1 The USEPA’s Area-Wide Optimization Program (AWOP) and the Partnership for Safe Water are two programs that promote
drinking water optimization. The Partnership for Safe Water is an alliance of the American Water Works Association (AWWA),
Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA), Association of State Drinking Water Administrators (ASDWA), National
Association of Water Companies (NAWC), USEPA, and the Water Research Foundation (WRF).
Additional information about the AWOP can be found at https://www.epa.gov/dwstandardsregulations/optimization-program-
drinking-water-systems
2
(organics), and surface charge, should be investigated for optimizing each water treatment unit process
for cyanobacteria cell removal (e.g., through jar testing).
Cyanotoxins present some unique challenges for water treatment plants, which may include:
• Chemical and biological parameters can vary widely in source water, both over time and by
location.
• The presence of cells does not necessarily mean that toxins are present at any given time. Toxins
can also be present even when cell concentrations are low. High toxin concentrations can also
persist after blooms/cells are no longer in the source water.
• Cyanotoxins can be located within the intact cyanobacteria cell (termed “intracellular” or “cell-
bound”) or outside the cell within the water matrix (termed “extracellular” or “dissolved”).
Some water treatment approaches, including the application of particular
oxidants/disinfectants, can release the toxins from the cyanobacteria cells, thereby increasing
the extracellular toxin concentration. Therefore, the choice and location of oxidant application
can be challenging.
Responding to these challenges requires balancing multiple, and sometimes competing, treatment
objectives. The following sections discuss monitoring and treatment optimization for removing
cyanotoxins while attempting to address potentially competing treatment objectives.
Section 2: Understanding source water to anticipate treatment needs
2.1 Ambient source water conditions that favor cyanobacteria proliferation
Cyanobacteria are often part of a healthy aquatic ecosystem and exist in balance with other aquatic
organisms. HABs occur when certain water quality, hydrologic, environmental, climatic, and atmospheric
conditions favor cyanobacteria proliferation. Availability of nutrients, particularly nitrogen and
phosphorous, tends to impact cyanobacteria growth in most water bodies. Therefore, when nutrient
levels increase, the mass of cyanobacteria usually increases. Temperature and light intensity affect
cyanobacteria proliferation as well. Warmer water temperatures, typically 25°C (77°F) or greater, favor
growth of some cyanobacteria. Microcystis growth is usually limited below 15°C (59°F) (Robarts and
Zohary, 1987), but other cyanobacteria, such as Planktothrix and Cylindrospermopsis, can survive in
colder temperatures, even under ice, either as akinetes or in a vegetative state (Dokulil, 2016; Holland &
Walsby, 2008). Because cyanobacteria are photosynthetic, they favor long periods of sunlight. Wind
patterns can also influence the location of the bloom and concentration of cyanobacteria cells (and
therefore potential cyanotoxin concentration) on a specific water body. Warmer, calmer, shallow bays
are conducive for cyanobacteria bloom formation, as are shallow inlets that receive high nutrient loads.
Wind patterns have the potential to concentrate blooms into scums, which can represent a thousand-
fold to million-fold concentration of cyanobacteria cell populations (Chorus & Bartram, 1999). This is
especially concerning if the wind direction and scum formation occur in the vicinity of a PWS intake.
Table 2-1 summarizes water quality conditions favorable for cyanobacteria proliferation:
3
Table 2-1. Water quality conditions favorable for cyanobacteria proliferation
Source Water Condition: When to take notice:
Excessive nutrients Nitrogen and/or phosphorous are the primary
nutrients of concern for cyanobacteria. Elevated
nitrogen and/or phosphorous levels can lead to
cyanobacteria proliferation. Different water
bodies will have different levels of nutrients that
can favor cyanobacteria proliferation.
Quiescence Calm, stagnant waters (i.e., low flow or slope in
rivers; low turnover or wind conditions in
lakes/reservoirs; etc.).
Weather Conditions When to take notice:
Water temperature Water temperatures above 25°C (or lower for
some cyanobacteria species)
Light intensity and rainfall Rainfall followed by prolonged periods of sunlight
and dry conditions. Rain washes nutrients into
the water body and subsequent sunny and dry
conditions can lead to cyanobacteria
proliferation.
Wind patterns Wind conditions that concentrate surface blooms
in warm, shallow parts of a water body in the
vicinity of nutrient sources. Strong winds can also
mix surface blooms downward toward intake
depths.
Competition between algal species also occurs as conditions change. Each algal species has its optimal
conditions, such as light, water temperature, pH, nutrients, etc. that control their proliferation in a given
water body (AWWA, 2010). As noted above, not all algal blooms consist predominantly of
cyanobacteria, and not all cyanobacteria blooms produce cyanotoxins; therefore, water quality
monitoring is important because it can provide baseline information that will assist PWSs in
understanding critical factors in source water that contribute to cyanobacteria blooms.
2.2 Bloom identification, confirmation, and quantification in source water
A good understanding of the vulnerability and historical cyanobacteria and cyanotoxin levels in a water
treatment plant’s source water allows utilities to take proactive and preventative approaches to water
treatment in the plant. In support of this, adequate time for sampling and analysis should be built into a
proactive monitoring approach, with the understanding that different cyanotoxin methods require
different amounts of time to generate results.
2.2.1 Indirect cyanobacteria screening methods
Often, the most obvious sign of a HAB is simply visual. Operators are encouraged to visually inspect their
source water regularly, especially in the vicinity of intakes. There are several inexpensive indicators that
treatment plant operators can proactively monitor in their source water that may suggest action to
identify elevated cyanobacteria biomass levels and potential cyanobacteria problems. This entails
4
routine monitoring and trending of the data to establish baseline levels for their source water and
identify changes in these levels that may merit a monitoring/treatment response. Detecting significant
deviations from normal, or baseline levels, of these indicators would alert the operator to begin direct
screening for cyanobacteria and analyses for cyanotoxins; however, these indicators do not take the
place of quantitative, confirmatory measurements. Table 2-2 summarizes some source water
measurements that could be utilized as indicators of potential cyanobacteria problems. Measuring a
combination of these indicator parameters as part of the HAB screening process best allows one to
assess source water.
Table 2-2. Source water quality indicators
Parameter Description
Pigments: Chlorophyll-a and/or Phycocyanin Extractive pigment measurements (as
differentiated from probes or flow-through
instruments) include EPA Method 445.0 for
chlorophyll-a (U.S. EPA, 1997), which can be run
at a water plant.
Another site-specific parameter is phycocyanin.
Phycocyanin is a pigment unique to
cyanobacteria, and elevated levels can indicate
cyanobacteria proliferation (Brient, et al., 2008;
AWWA, 2010; Kasinak et al., 2015) and
differentiate from other types of algae. At this
time there is not a published EPA method for
phycocyanin. There are, however, numerous
commercial in-vivo2 methods for measuring
phycocyanin and chlorophyll-a with probes or
flow-through instruments. These can be placed
on a buoy, inline at a raw water intake, in a pump
wet well, etc.
Turbidity There are limitations on using turbidity as an
indicator for cyanobacteria cell concentration,
especially if raw water is less than 10 NTU
(Newcombe, et al., 2015); however, unexplained
increases (e.g., with no recent rainfall) may be
related to increases in cyanobacteria biomass.
Secchi depth This is a simple, inexpensive test for source
water. Decreases in Secchi depth may indicate
increased cyanobacteria concentration, although
it has limitations similar to those with turbidity.
Diurnal pH changes or increases in pH associated Diurnal changes in source water pH (increasing
with a bloom during the day, decreases at night) or prolonged
increases in pH could indicate the presence, or
proliferation, of cyanobacteria. This is due to the
cyanobacteria’s photosynthesis (light availability
2 In-vivo fluorescence methods that are typically used with probes or flow-through instruments are based on illuminating the
sample with light at phycocyanin’s excitation wavelength and then reading the response at the emission wavelength.
5
Parameter Description
and CO absorption) during the day and cell
2
respiration at night. (Usui and Kasubuchi, 2011;
Usui, et al., 2003).
Taste & odor (T&O) compounds (MIB, geosmin, T&O compounds may coexist with some
β-cyclocitral) cyanobacteria blooms, and depending on the
species and type of T&O compound, could be
indicators of cyanobacteria presence3. However,
it is possible to have T&O without cyanotoxins
and vice versa.
Temperature, nutrients Elevated temperatures and nutrient (nitrogen
and phosphorus) concentrations are more
conducive to producing cyanobacteria blooms.
Natural organic matter (NOM) Increases in NOM in source water, with no recent
rainfall, could be indicative of a cyanobacteria
issue.
Operators may also notice changes within the treatment plant that could be indicative of cyanobacteria
in the source water. These could include:
• An increase in color (most likely green) observed visually in the raw water or elsewhere within
the treatment plant (e.g., in clarifiers or dissolved air flotation (DAF) and filter surface scums).
• An increase in treatment difficulties, for example, decreased filter run times, increased chemical
needs/usage, difficulty in maintaining a finished water residual or meeting turbidity goals.
• Observation of seasonal shifts in treatment. Consideration of these seasonal changes could help
shape HAB monitoring programs or HAB treatment planning.
2.2.2 Direct cyanobacteria measurement methods
Direct measurements of cyanobacteria proliferation in source water is ideal, but there are limited
options available. Species identification is an important factor in understanding the type of cyanotoxins
potentially present, which is helpful information in determining the appropriate cyanotoxin analysis.
Cyanobacteria cell counting and identification can be accomplished by analysts trained in microscopy
and algal identification. Assistance and confirmation may be necessary from a trained phycologist, or
other appropriately-trained individual. DNA technology for identifying cyanobacteria and cyanotoxin
production capacity in source water is an emerging tool. Research suggests that the microcystins-
producing gene cluster is rarely present without the toxin being synthesized by the cell. Therefore, gene
sequencing, such as that accomplished through polymerase chain reaction (PCR), could be an option for
monitoring. Commercial molecular assays that utilize certified reference materials are available to help
standardize this method. Because molecular techniques require specialized equipment and training to
run the method and interpret the results, their use is probably limited to utilities with access to more
3 Note that Microcystis does not produce the most common T&O compounds, methylisoborneol (MIB) or geosmin. This genus
usually produces β-cyclocitral, dimethyl trisulfide (DMT), diisopropyl disulfide (DID), and/or diisopropyl trisulfide (DIT). β-
cyclocitral is a T&O compound produced during cell damage or death (AWWA, 2010), which could be indicative of Microcystis
cell lysis (and thus, potential toxin release).
6
sophisticated labs. For more information on cyanobacteria identification and differentiation from algae,
see Rosen and St. Amand (USGS), 2015 or AWWA M57, 2010.
2.3 Cyanotoxin measurement
The monitoring methods mentioned above help alert operators to the presence of cyanobacteria and
potential presence of cyanotoxins in their source water. These indicators may signal the need for more
quantitative, confirmatory measurements, cyanotoxin analyses.
Qualitative screening tests, such as commercially-available immunochromatographic strip tests for
microcystins4, cylindrospermopsin, and anatoxin-a, can be useful to determine the presence or absence
of cyanotoxins in water samples and alert utilities of the need for further, more quantitative cyanotoxin
analysis. These analyses can take approximately one hour, or more or less depending on the method,
sample preparation requirements, and individual lab practitioner.
When conducting quantitative cyanotoxin analyses, the type and form of cyanotoxins are important for
a water treatment plant operator to determine, as treatment approaches can differ significantly based
on which cyanotoxin is present and whether or not the cyanotoxins are primarily intracellular (located
inside the cyanobacteria cell) or extracellular (located outside the cyanobacteria cell). Regardless of the
analytical method, sample preparation determines whether the measured cyanotoxins are intracellular
or extracellular. Typically, a sample is split into two. One fraction is filtered or centrifuged before
analysis. The filtrate/supernatant is used for the analysis, yielding a measurement of extracellular
cyanotoxin concentration. The other sample fraction is lysed (e.g., freeze-thaw, sonication techniques)
before analysis – releasing the cyanotoxins from the cells. The subsequent analysis will then yield the
total cyanotoxin concentration. The intracellular fraction is then calculated by the difference, such that:
T - E = I
[ otal concentration] [ xtracellular concentration] [ntracellular concentration]
The following subsections describe some of the more common analytical methods for evaluating
cyanotoxins in water. The description is not all-inclusive, and the body of available analytical methods
continues to grow. When considering various methods, one should verify that the detection limit is
appropriate for finished water characterization (e.g., the Health Advisory levels for children less than six
years old of 0.3 µg/L for total microcystins and 0.7 µg/L for cylindrospermopsin). As with any analytical
method, it is important to follow the established sample collection, preservation, storage, and
preparation steps (Kamp et al., 2016). For example, it is important to quench5 finished water samples
during collection if exposed to oxidants, protect samples from sunlight, and chill samples at a
temperature according to the method prior to analysis (Ohio EPA, 2015; USEPA, 2015g,h; Kamp et al.,
2016).
2.3.1 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits are commercially available for measurement of
microcystins and cylindrospermopsin, saxitoxin, and anatoxin-a. These assays utilize antigen/antibody
interactions to identify and quantify chemical contaminants and can be either “competitive”, where
color response is inversely proportional to the toxin concentration, or “non-competitive”, where color
4 Options are available for microcystins for both source (with a lysing step) and finished water.
5 For example, with sodium thiosulfate, depending on the method requirements, type of oxidant present, and analyte.
7
response is directly proportional to the toxin concentration (AWWA, 2010). Because the EPA Health
Advisory for microcystins applies to “total” microcystins, as opposed to a specific microcystin
congener(s), operators will generally want to use a method that addresses microcystins broadly. The
ADDA-ELISA test kits detect the standard 3-amino-9-methoxy-2,6,8-trimethyl-10-phenyldeca-4,6-dienoic
acid (ADDA) moiety in the microcystin molecule, which is a unique amino acid within the molecule that
is common to a majority of microcystin congeners and a related cyanotoxin, nodularin (Fischer et al.,
2001). Thus, this competitive assay technique is generally believed to provide a good representation of
total microcystins. USEPA has published EPA Method 546 for determination of total microcystins and
nodularin by ADDA-ELISA (USEPA, 2016). In addition, the Ohio EPA has posted an “Analytical
Methodology” for measuring microcystins with the commercially-available ADDA-ELISA technique to its
website as a resource for water treatment plant operators (Ohio EPA, 2015). To achieve representative,
reliable results, it is important to have a consistent approach and adhere to the terms of the method.
EPA Method 546 establishes specific sample collection, preservation, storage, quality control,
calibration, and data analysis criteria in order to ensure accuracy and precision of the method.
Table 2-3. Advantages and disadvantages of ELISA for cyanotoxin monitoring
Strengths Limitations
• Method is relatively easy to learn and • Since the method involves working with
use. small volumes, it requires good
• Relatively inexpensive (as low as $11 per micropipetteing skills and an 8-channel
sample [as of 2015]6, assuming full plates pipette. Good laboratory technique is
are run). important to achieve consistent results.
• Can be run relatively quickly compared to • The calibration curve is non-linear (four-
LC/MS/MS techniques (discussed further parameter logistic equation) and
below) – typically about 4 hours, accuracy may be questionable at
including sample preparation. concentration ranges above or below the
• Numerous manufacturers of ELISA kits. linear portion of the calibration curve
• The ADDA-based measurements are (see EPA Method 546 [USEPA, 2016] for a
congener-independent (i.e., the ADDA discussion on the EC 50 and establishing a
structure is common to a majority of minimum reporting level [MRL] and
microcystin congeners), therefore calibration curve).7
providing an indication of “total • Calibration is based on a microcystin-LR
microcystins”. standard and other microcystin
congeners have exhibited variable cross-
reactivity relative to microcystin-LR. This
may introduce error into the total
microcystins result.
6 This is a minimum cost estimate and assumes full use of the plate (all wells) with the minimum dedicated to
calibration/control. Assumes $440 for the ELISA ADDA kit, 96 wells with 16 wells dedicated to calibration/control and 80 wells
for samples. Assumes duplicate wells per sample, therefore there is room for 40 unknowns, which equals $11 per sample. The
upper bound of this estimate, that is, running only one sample per plate, would be the price of the kit itself (i.e., $440 per
sample), assuming the minimum 16 wells are dedicated to calibration/control. Therefore, the more samples run on a given
plate (up to 40), the less expensive each analysis becomes.
7 As stated in EPA Method 546, the “EC is the concentration of microcystin that yields an absorbance halfway between the
50
bottom plateau of the calibration curve and the top plateau. The EC is the concentration at the inflection point (of the
50
calibration curve) and is in the center of the most reliable measurement range…”.
8
Strengths Limitations
• Does not yield congener-specific
information.
• Since the different manufacturers
generally use proprietary antibodies in
the assay, variations in results between
manufacturers may be expected.
• Since LC/MS/MS methods for
microcystins focus on a limited number
of congeners, and since standards are
only available for a limited number of
microcystin congeners, one cannot truly
“confirm” ELISA-based microcystins
results with LC/MS/MS methods.
2.3.2 Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS)
Liquid chromatography is a separation technique that allows for mass analysis by mass spectrometry.
Most water utilities do not have LC/MS/MS capabilities in-house and utilize contract laboratories for this
purpose. USEPA has published two cyanotoxin-related analytical methods for LC/MS/MS – EPA Method
544, which measures six microcystin congeners (MC-LA, MC-LF, MC-LR, MC-LY, MC-RR, and MC-YR) and
nodularin (U.S. EPA, 2015h), and EPA Method 545, which measures anatoxin-a and cylindrospermopsin
(U.S. EPA, 2015g). Others have developed LC/MS/MS methods as well. Note that EPA Methods 544 and
545 were developed for analysis of finished drinking water samples. Work is underway to expand the
scope of EPA Methods 544 and 545 to ambient (source) water samples.
While there can be value in using LC/MS/MS techniques to understand the occurrence of particular
microcystin congeners, as of the time this document was written, they cannot practically be used to
“confirm” ELISA results. LC/MS/MS methods for microcystins currently focus on a limited number of
specific microcystin congeners, whereas ELISA methods measure microcystins more broadly.
Work is underway to evaluate an LC/MS/MS technique that is based on measuring 3-methyloxy-2-
methyl-4-phenylbutyric acid (“MMPB”). MMPB is an oxidation product of microcystins (e.g., produced
via oxidative cleavage) and has the potential to serve as a measure of microcystins, broadly. Foss et al.
found that “(w)hen summarizing the total microcystins detected in raw samples…, the MMPB method
accounted for an average of 99% of the microcystins detected using ELISA, while individual variant
analysis of 13 congeners using LC/MS/MS accounted for 81%” (Foss and Aubel, 2015). The LC/MS/MS
MMPB technique has proven valuable for confirming ELISA results from raw water samples, but may
have some limitations with finished water analysis due to potential for detection of microcystins
oxidation byproducts.
LC/MS/MS can reliably confirm cylindrospermopsin or anatoxin-a ELISA results.
Table 2-4. Advantages and Disadvantages of LC/MS/MS for cyanotoxin monitoring
Strengths Limitations
• Congener-specific measurement • Only measures compounds for which an
analytical standard exists.
9
Strengths Limitations
• Precise, accurate measurement. Can • EPA Methods 544 and 545 are currently
measure specific microcystin congeners, applicable to finished water samples
cylindrospermopsin and anatoxin-a. only.
• More expensive than ELISA.8
• Requires specialized equipment and
experienced analyst.
• The LC/MS/MS results may take longer to
receive, compared to ELISA analysis, if
measured by an offsite laboratory.
2.3.3 Cyanotoxin toxicity measurement
ELISA and LC/MS/MS methods are used to directly measure cyanotoxin concentrations. There are also
“indirect” methods that focus on measures of toxicity, such as phosphatase inhibition assay kits. These
tend to be less selective than ELISA and typically yield results presented in “microcystin-LR toxicity
equivalents” (AWWA, 2010). It is unclear how applicable the toxicity equivalent is to judge a utility’s risk,
since EPA’s current Health Advisory is based on cyanotoxin concentration.
2.4 Source water considerations and associated short-term management strategies
Source water quality management strategies are usually short-term solutions to larger nutrient loading
issues. Source water management techniques may be able to temporarily treat HABs, however the
underlying cause of HABs is usually nutrient loading on the water body (nitrogen and phosphorous)
(NEIWPCC, 2015). If screening or monitoring shows an increasing trend in cyanobacteria, cyanotoxin, or
indirect indicators, response strategies for water treatment plant operators generally include exploring
various treatment adjustments that can be made in order to minimize cell-bound (intracellular)
cyanotoxin release and passage into finished water. Additional strategies may be needed if extracellular
cyanotoxins are present. More detailed treatment information is provided in Section 3, however some
near-term source water treatment strategies, which will have system-specific applicability, include:
• Continue monitoring biomass (cell identification and enumeration, or screening indicator
parameters) and toxin type and concentration to determine where toxins are located within the
water source (i.e., relative to the plant intake).
• Understand whether the toxins are primarily intracellular or extracellular to best direct
treatment strategies.
• Monitoring water quality at various depths and changing intake levels as warranted. Often
cyanobacteria cells are located at different levels in the water column. Water quality
monitoring at each depth is important to help discern whether changing the intake level would
avoid the bloom – and not significantly compromise other treatment objectives (e.g.,
manganese removal, disinfection byproduct control, corrosion control).
8 Costs for LC/MS/MS are dependent on several factors including whether the utility has access to LC/MS/MS instrumentation
and the cost of commercial lab analysis (which varies). For resources to assess cost and laboratory availability, see USEPA’s
CyanoHAB website (https://www.epa.gov/nutrient-policy-data/state-resources). The New England Interstate Water Pollution
Control Commission (NEIWPCC) also has produced a list of laboratories that provide cyanobacteria and cyanotoxin services,
including costs as of March 2016.
10
• Cease or limit algaecide applications to source waters in use. In some instances, algaecide can
prevent full proliferation of a bloom if it is applied very early in the bloom cycle, such that the
low cell count would result in low toxin levels if cells did lyse and release toxins. However,
algaecide application during a full cyanotoxin-producing bloom is generally discouraged as it can
stress or lyse cells resulting in high levels of cyanotoxin release. For source waters actively being
used, consider sampling the bloom for cyanotoxins prior to any algaecide application to evaluate
the potential for cyanotoxin release following application. Alternatively, one can temporarily
discontinue use of a source water during algaecide application and sample for cyanotoxins prior
to placing it back in service.
• Utilize an alternate water source (i.e., location not impacted by the bloom). If cyanotoxins are
elevated to a concentration that may be difficult to treat, consider emergency interconnections
with neighboring water systems, if available. Thorough source water and water quality analyses
should be considered if pursuing this option.
2.5 Long-term strategies to prevent or mitigate cyanobacteria blooms in source water
A source watershed nutrient management plan or establishing source water nutrient goals can be an
important element of a longer-term strategy to mitigate cyanobacteria blooms. Nutrients, such as
nitrogen and phosphorous, are often key factors in cyanobacteria proliferation, and some states are
beginning to explore watershed-wide nutrient management strategies with the goal of preventing
future HABs. The New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission, in its Harmful Algal
Bloom Control Methods Synopses document, states that “effective watershed management to reduce
nutrient pollution to a waterbody is often difficult, expensive, and time consuming. Regardless, it is key
to reducing the occurrence and frequency of HABs and to addressing other water quality problems
associated with eutrophication” (NEIWPCC, 2015). As stated in “Recommendations for Public Water
Systems to Prepare for and Respond to Cyanotoxins in Drinking Water”, “Local source water assessment
or protection organizations may also be leveraged to communicate key messages to the drinking water
community; a few of these watershed groups can be found through the Source Water Collaborative
“How to Collaborate Toolkit” (SWC, 2015a)” (U.S. EPA, 2015c). This approach is watershed-specific and
would require the cooperation of multiple entities such as local governments, landowners, and nearby
water utilities and wastewater plants9.
Utilities with persistent HAB problems can also explore the possibility of accessing or blending with
alternate water sources that are not impacted by HABs, when needed. Multiple issues such as treatment
changes, residual maintenance, corrosion control, and state review/approval would have to be
addressed before implementation. Potential options include:
• Planning for alternate intake levels or locations in a HAB-impacted reservoir (i.e., identifying an
area that is not impacted, or is less impacted, by the bloom). Again, water quality monitoring
would be important to confirm that the alternate intake represents a superior location and that
other treatment objectives are not compromised.
• Using an alternate reservoir or source of water, such as a river intake that is not impacted by
HABs or groundwater. There are significant treatment and distribution system implications that
must be considered if this strategy is utilized, as mentioned above.
9 Additional tools for reducing nutrients can be found through ASDWA’s website (www.asdwa.org).
11
• Purchasing water from neighboring systems not impacted by HABs. This may require
distribution system upgrades and may result in other secondary impacts related to distribution
system water quality and hydraulics. Thorough source water and water quality analyses should
be considered if pursuing this option.
• Managing source water or employing preventive treatment measures. Thorough analysis should
be conducted prior to implementing these strategies to consider all potential water uses,
ecological effects, design challenges, and resulting impacts on water quality. States or primacy
agencies may also have regulations that may apply to some source water management /
preventive treatment measures discussed here:
Utilities can consider the applicability of circulation (aeration or mixing). This can be
o
accomplished using hypolimnetic bubble aeration or mechanical mixing. Cyanobacteria
prefer calm, stagnant water in order to proliferate. Adding hypolimnetic aeration or
mixing would disrupt the stratification and stagnation of the water body and mitigate
cyanobacteria growth. As a cost-effective strategy, hypolimnetic aeration or mechanical
mixing can be placed strategically close, and at the depth of, the water treatment plant
intake.
Strategic, optimized timing/dose of algaecide application. The use of algaecides is
o
generally discouraged during a full cyanobacteria bloom, as this risks cell lysis causing
cyanotoxin release. However, as stated above in Section II.D, in some instances,
algaecide can prevent full proliferation of a bloom if it is applied very early in the bloom
cycle, such that the low cell count would result in low toxin levels if cells did lyse and
release toxins. Long-term, if algaecides are necessary, utilities can investigate optimal
doses and timing of algaecide application to prevent full bloom proliferation and
minimize extracellular cyanotoxins.
Flocculants applied to source water can limit cyanobacteria bloom proliferation by
o
addressing biologically-available phosphorous by binding and settling (sometimes
referred to as “sequestration”). As stated previously, phosphorous is a key nutrient and
cause of HABs in many water bodies. For example alum, a common coagulant used in
conventional drinking water treatment, can be used for the purpose of phosphorous
sequestration in source water. The phosphorous is removed either by precipitation /
sedimentation or adsorption mechanisms.
Ultrasound/sonication. Above certain frequencies in water, ultrasound waves cause
o
formation of microbubbles which, upon collapse, can damage cell walls. This is called
“acoustic cavitation”. Low-power ultrasound/sonication systems are also available that
use sound wave resonance in the water to collapse the gas vesicles in the cyanobacteria
cell that are used to regulate the cell’s buoyancy, thus rendering the cell incapable of
moving through the water column to locate optimal light conditions for photosynthesis.
Different source waters with different cyanobacteria species will require different
ultrasound frequencies for optimal results. A potential concern with ultrasound
treatment for cyanobacteria is the possibility of cell disruption causing cyanotoxin
release.
Some utilities have reported success with hexagonal tile covers that are placed on the
o
surface of the source water, generally for small water bodies, forebays or lagoons. The
tile covers can serve two purposes in mitigating cyanobacteria proliferation: (1) reducing
12
sunlight exposure of the water, thereby reducing photosynthetic activity; and (2)
deterring birds and other waterfowl from using the water body, which could reduce this
source of nutrient inputs.
• For more detailed information on source water management and preventive treatment
strategies for HABs, the New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission (NEIWPCC)
has developed a Harmful Algal Bloom Control Methods Synopsis document (NEIWPCC, 2015).
Section 3: Treatment options based on source water quality
“Conventional” water treatment, defined here as having coagulation, clarification, and filtration
processes, is typically effective at addressing intracellular cyanotoxins by removing the cyanobacteria
cells (Health Canada, 2002). When a majority of cyanotoxins exist in the intracellular form (as is often
the case with microcystins), and cells are not lysed, damaged, or stressed (Ross, et. al., 2006),
conventional treatment processes are generally effective. However, if the cells become lysed or, in the
case of cylindrospermopsin, which tends to partition between intracellular and extracellular closer to
50%-50% (AWWA, 2010), the appropriate approach may involve conventional treatment (i.e.,
coagulation, clarification and filtration) followed by an adsorption or oxidation step (NHMRC and
NRMMC, 2011). Additionally, powdered activated carbon (PAC) may be added early in the treatment
process to enhance extracellular toxin removal.
In order to evaluate treatment efficacy at a particular plant, regular monitoring and data trending,
especially during HAB events, is important throughout the plant. Most of the parameters discussed
above for source water monitoring may also be applicable indicators for the water treatment plant.
However, once a HAB is confirmed and cyanotoxins are detected in the source water, daily cyanotoxin
monitoring in the plant is the most prudent way of protecting public health and ensuring the quality of
the finished water. For additional discussion of monitoring frequency, refer to Steps 4 and 5, and Figure
2 of “Recommendations for Public Water Systems to Prepare for and Respond to Cyanotoxins in
Drinking Water” (U.S. EPA, 2015c).
13
Figure 3-1. Water treatment decision-tree for cyanotoxins detected in source water.
This figure begins with a “YES” answer to Step 3 of the “Recommendations” document decision-tree and is intended to provide more treatment
detail to Steps 4 and 5 of that document.
14
Monitoring at multiple locations in the process train (the selection of which will depend on the plant
configuration and chemical feed locations) can help water treatment plant operators evaluate the
effectiveness of each unit process. This might include source water, raw water (with chemical addition if
possible), recycle water feed, after chemical addition in the rapid mix (i.e., after chemicals are
completely mixed), settled water, individual and combined filter effluent, and finished water. Once
operators understand the performance of, and identify any limitations in each unit process, treatment
adjustments can be made to improve toxin removal. The approach to making treatment adjustments for
cyanotoxins depends on the monitoring results and type of cyanotoxins present (e.g., microcystins,
cylindrospermopsin, or others). If cyanotoxins are present, it is helpful to understand if they are located
within the cyanobacteria cell (intracellular) or outside the cell within the water matrix (extracellular).
This can be accomplished through the analytical techniques mentioned above. Figure 3-1 depicts a
suggested decision-tree10 for water treatment plant operators that are currently monitoring their source
water for cyanobacteria, cyanotoxins, and/or indicators.
3.1 Treatment considerations for intracellular cyanotoxins
If cyanobacteria species and source water conditions are such that there is a significant fraction of toxins
in intracellular form, a strategy that limits toxin release and maximizes cyanobacteria cell removal
through the water plant should be considered. Specifically, operators would generally want to
investigate their ability to stop or limit any pre-oxidation (i.e., oxidation prior to cell removal) and limit
algaecide application, while focusing on optimizing their coagulation, clarification, and filtration
processes for cyanobacteria cell removal. This may compromise other treatment objectives (i.e.,
manganese removal), that need to be considered while treating for cyanobacteria cell removal. Figure 3-
2 depicts a plant schematic with treatment considerations for intracellular cyanotoxins at each process,
which are discussed in more detail below
10 The decision-tree presented in “Recommendations for Public Water Systems to Prepare for and Respond to Cyanotoxins in
Drinking Water” provides a framework for assessing vulnerability to, preparation for, monitoring for, and communication to
stakeholders for HABs. The decision tree presented in the current document (Figure 3-1) provides specific treatment
optimization strategies to guide water treatment plants that are already performing monitoring for HABs and that detect
cyanobacteria or toxins in their source water or plant. In that sense, this fits into the treatment portion of Steps 4 and 5 of the
“Recommendations” document’s decision-tree. Please refer to that document for details about establishing vulnerability
assessments, preparation, monitoring programs, and communication to stakeholders for HABs.
15
Figure 3-2. Intracellular cyanotoxin treatment considerations
The focus of this figure on intracellular toxin treatment is on the physical removal of cells.
16
Although not depicted in Figure 3-2, microfiltration and ultrafiltration may also effectively address
intracellular toxins by cell removal, without significant cell lysis and associated release of toxins into the
water. Operational considerations if using micro- or ultrafiltration membranes for cyanobacteria cell
removal during a HAB include evaluating backwash and cleaning frequencies due to plugging of screens
and reduced flux and permeability. Microfiltration and ultrafiltration are not effective means of
removing extracellular toxins however, as the molecular weight cutoff for these types of filters is greater
than the molecular weight of the toxins (AWWA, 2010). For further discussion on membranes, see the
“Treatment considerations for extracellular toxins” section below.
Operational considerations and potential studies for intracellular cyanotoxin removal through use of
conventional water treatment are discussed below, and a more detailed checklist is provided in Table A-
1 in the Appendices.
Operational considerations and potential studies:
A key component of an optimization program is process control and related problem solving activities.
Plant staff can use tailored studies, based on the scientific method, to conduct in-house investigations
on issues impacting performance. Below is a summary of relevant operational considerations and
potential studies for water plants dealing with a HAB event. Implementing these strategies and
conducting studies prior to a bloom will help plant operators be in a better position to respond to a
cyanobacteria event.
• If a cyanobacteria bloom is detected in source water, operators can measure toxin
concentrations in the clarifier effluent and compare concentrations at this location to raw water
to determine if toxins are released prior to this location (e.g., settled cells, or in other upstream
processes). If they are, consider additional sampling upstream to pinpoint the location of toxin
release and respond appropriately through treatment (as discussed in Section 3.2) and consider
tailored studies focused on reducing the release of cyanotoxins.
• In anticipation of reducing or stopping pre-oxidant use to minimize toxin release, studies can
help assess and mitigate the impact of doing so on other treatment objectives that the pre-
oxidant may be used to achieve (e.g., turbidity, TOC, and manganese removal; algae control in
the plant; mussel control in intake line). Planning for and considering how these objectives will
be achieved prior to the bloom season is critical.
• Optimizing coagulant and polymer dosing can maximize cell removal through the treatment
process. This can be effectively evaluated in most plants using jar testing. Based on the
literature (Newcombe, et al., 2015; Chow, et al., 1999; Henderson, et al., 2008; Vlaski, et al.,
1996), NOM11, particle count, streaming current, zeta potential (Walker, 2015), UV, color,
and/or pigment (i.e., phycocyanin or chlorophyll-a) may be useful parameters to evaluate during
jar testing for optimization of the coagulation/sedimentation process. Also, coagulation pH will
be an important variable to optimize. Given the variability that may occur with different
coagulants and cyanobacteria species, operators should aim to maintain pH in a range between
6 and 8 through the plant for best cell removal and subsequent toxin oxidation.
11 Optimized NOM removal (defined as lowest ΔC/C0 for DOC and UV, and color ≤ 0.05) resulted in optimized cyanobacteria cell
removal in Newcombe, et. al. 2015.
17
• Operators should consider trending water quality data, including individual filter effluent (IFE),
backwash water, and filter-to-waste (where applicable) turbidity values to understand baseline
performance and compare during water quality challenges such as HABs. Trending settled water
turbidity and cyanotoxin concentration during HABs will help to understand how the
sedimentation process is performing.
• It is important to minimize the sludge age in clarifiers and increase the frequency of filter
backwashing because settled and/or filtered cells can remain viable and possibly multiply over a
period of at least 2-3 weeks. Within one day, cells in the sludge can lyse and release NOM and
T&O compounds, in addition to cyanotoxins (Newcombe, et al., 2015). A water treatment plant
should investigate options for design or operational modifications to enable more frequent
cleaning.
• Operators who ensure that filters are optimized for turbidity removal and strive to achieve the
optimization goal presented in the CCP Handbook (U.S. EPA, 2004) of ≤0.10 NTU in 95% of
samples will generally be better prepared to deal with cyanotoxin challenges. Filter aid polymers
may help cyanobacteria cell removal. Backwashing filters based on water quality data, such as
effluent turbidity, rather than length of time in service can lead to more optimal filter operation.
Studies using turbidity data can help operators optimize the backwash and filter-to-waste times,
if applicable. High-rate backwash times may need to be extended in the event of a
cyanobacteria bloom, while monitoring the filter so that it does not lose media. Utilities can also
experiment with air scour, surface wash, and/or collapse-bed pulsing if applicable to their plant.
• Backwash water recycling during a HAB can be problematic. Studies can help operators
understand the impacts of stopping backwash water recycling on raw water quality and
backwash water disposal. Some systems may have backwash water treatment, in which case
optimization can be pursued with tailored studies.
3.2 Treatment considerations for extracellular cyanotoxins
Because water utilities are designed to remove particulates as a matter of course, the preferred
approach for water plants is to remove toxins while they are still in the intracellular form (i.e., within the
intact cells), (AWWA, 2010). However, HABs can lyse in the environment, releasing the toxins into the
extracellular, or dissolved, state. Also, some cyanobacteria species partition toxins between intracellular
and extracellular states as a matter of course (as mentioned previously, for example,
cylindrospermopsin tends to partition closer to 50%-50% extracellular-intracellular (AWWA, 2010)).
From a treatment perspective, the use of a pre-oxidant will increase the risk of cell lysis or stress, which
could lead to toxin release. Therefore, given the potential for extracellular toxins, specific treatment
considerations to address them at each process are presented in Figure 3-3 and are discussed in more
detail below the figure.
18
Figure 3-3. Extracellular cyanotoxin treatment considerations
The focus of this figure on extracellular cyanotoxin treatment is on adsorption, nanofiltration or RO, and oxidation.
19
3.2.1 Carbon adsorption
Carbon is often used at water treatment plants to remove taste and odor (T&O) and other organic
compounds, typically in the form of powdered activated carbon (PAC) and granular activated carbon
(GAC). Research has demonstrated effective removal of microcystins using PAC or GAC, and more
limited research on the removal of cylindrospermopsin, anatoxin-a, and saxitoxin has also exhibited
promising results (Walker, 2015). The type of carbon and corresponding mesopore size are important
factors in determining the efficacy that carbon adsorption will have on the extracellular cyanotoxins.
Wood-based or lignite-type carbon, with mesopores between 2-50 nanometers (nm) has been found to
be most effective for microcystins (Walker, 2015; Ohio AWWA/Ohio EPA, 2015). However, this may
challenge a competing objective of using carbon in the water treatment process for T&O compound
removal, for which other types of carbon have been found to be most effective. Utilities should consider
this if they need to utilize carbon for removal of multiple constituents. For example, utilities may
consider using a mixture of carbons to remove cyanotoxins and T&O compounds.
T&O compounds, such as geosmin and methylisoborneol (MIB), NOM, and pre-oxidants such as
permanganate and chlorine can affect activated carbon’s ability to remove extracellular cyanotoxins.
These compounds tend to compete for adsorption sites with the cyanotoxin molecules. Therefore, jar
testing HAB-impacted raw water is an important step in optimizing not only coagulant/polymer, but also
PAC dosing. Similarly, performing rapid small-scale column tests (RSSCTs) or accelerated column tests
(ACTs) is an important step for understanding the empty-bed contact time (EBCT) and resulting media
life, or adsorption capacity, for GAC.
3.2.1.1 Powdered activated carbon (PAC)
PAC can be a short-term solution to cyanotoxin problems until more robust treatment can be installed.
Short-duration PAC application can also be an effective long-term strategy for systems faced with
seasonal cyanotoxin problems (repeated seasonal application) but lack the ability to install permanent
treatment solutions (such as GAC or ozone). Potential PAC feed points can include the raw water intake,
rapid mix prior to coagulation, or in clarifiers, depending on the application of other treatment
chemicals (i.e., pre-oxidants), desired contact time and subsequent settling time. In a similar fashion to
the CyanoTOX oxidant CT calculator, AWWA has also produced a “PAC Calculator for Cyanotoxin
Removal”, to be used in conjunction with the AWWA Cyanotoxin PAC Jar Testing Protocols12, to assist
utilities in estimating an appropriate PAC dose during a HAB episode. However, because numerous
factors impact performance, the optimal dose is best determined by jar testing with the actual water
that contains the dissolved cyanotoxins. Generally, the most effective removals are achieved using
wood-based PAC at contact times greater than about 45 minutes at a dose greater than 10 mg/L,
although this is highly source water dependent (Alvarez, et al., 2010). Operational considerations and
studies for PAC specific to cyanotoxin removal are discussed below, and a more detailed checklist is
provided in Table B-1 in the Appendices.
12 AWWA’s PAC Calculator for Cyanotoxin Removal and Cyanotoxin Jar Testing Protocols mentioned here, and the Cyanotoxin
Tool for Oxidation Kinetics (CyanoTOX) mentioned in Section 3.2.4, can be found at AWWA’s Cyanotoxins Resource Community
website (login required).
As with any tool or model, it is important that the user understands the limitations and assumptions of that tool. AWWA has
introductory tabs in each spreadsheet that discuss caveats and disclaimers for each tool. It is recommended that these pages be
consulted prior to using each tool.
20
Operational considerations and studies for PAC specific to cyanotoxin removal:
• If PAC is only used seasonally, planning prior to bloom season should include ensuring sufficient
supply of PAC and the ability to deliver and adequately mix a high PAC dose (i.e., greater than 10
mg/L). Utilities should also consider sufficient storage space and safety precautions as dust has
explosive hazard properties.
• Utility planning for operational impacts of utilizing PAC on their sedimentation and filtration
processes (i.e., more frequent sludge removal and disposal/treatment, potential for carbon fines
on the filters, etc.) is important. PAC cannot be regenerated or recycled.
• Utilities considering using PAC should ensure that their plant’s clarifiers are designed to allow
PAC feed. PAC can cause damage to sludge rakes and mixers if they are not designed for settling
and removing PAC.
• For plants that are not designed for feeding PAC, doses higher than about 10 mg/L may present
performance challenges. High PAC doses can result in carbon fines passing through filters and
increased filter effluent turbidity. Studies can be implemented to determine the optimum PAC
dose that can be achieved while maintaining turbidity removal goals. The use of flocculant and
filter aid polymers may be effective in enhancing PAC removal through sedimentation and
filtration.
3.2.1.2 Granular activated carbon (GAC)
Utilities repeatedly affected by cyanotoxins in their source water may consider adding GAC filters. GAC
has generally been shown to be effective for some cyanotoxin removal, especially using wood-based
carbon (AWWA, 2010; Walker, 2015). Rapid small-scale column tests (RSSCTs) or accelerated column
tests (ACTs) are valuable tools to determine if/when GAC is appropriate, to evaluate different carbon
media types, and to ensure a best-fit for the particular utility and its source water. RSSCTs or ACTs also
provide information on the necessary empty-bed contact time (EBCT) and the resulting media life before
regeneration or replacement is needed. Media life will vary depending on numerous factors including
carbon type, source water quality, and the desired effluent water quality. Due to the vagaries of bloom
dynamics, it is difficult to conduct a RSSCT test that will be applicable to multiple blooms. Often the
influent characteristics will differ from bloom to bloom in terms of concentrations and duration for both
the toxins and other water quality parameters that can affect adsorption such as TOC concentration,
temperature, pH, etc.
GAC is typically applied in one of two approaches. The first is as a filter adsorber where a portion of the
sand bed (the top portion) is replaced with GAC. If an adequate flow distributer is chosen, all of the sand
could be replaced with GAC. This allows the use of the existing sand filters. However, the depth of the
bed is often limited to short EBCTs that can fail to remove all the cyanotoxins in the mass transfer zone
resulting in early breakthrough. Particulate loading issues can also impact flow distribution, which would
further exacerbate the limited EBCT. The other approach to applying GAC is to utilize a deep bed, where
GAC column follows the sand filters, receiving the filter effluent. This is advantageous in that the GAC
column depth can be designed independent of the existing sand filters and the column will not require
as frequent backwashing as the sand filters. An increased EBCT will be more able to treat the cyanotoxin
event. The disadvantage to installing separate GAC columns after the sand filters is that this is more
capital intensive, as it requires the columns, plumbing, piping and instrumentation changes.
21
If GAC is pursued as an option, final design should consider that GAC filters are often used for more than
one purpose, such as control of pesticides, herbicides, disinfection byproduct precursors, taste and odor
events, and cyanotoxins. EBCTs reported in the literature typically range from 5 to 15 minutes, although
some carbon vendors recommend at least a 10 minute EBCT. Adequate EBCT allows for greater removal
of competing constituents such as TOC along with cyanotoxins, and allows for greater operational
flexibility. Media life reported in the literature for cyanotoxin removal ranges from weeks to 6 months
(Alvarez, et al., 2010), although this is highly site-specific. Operational considerations and studies for
GAC specific to cyanotoxin removal are discussed below, and a more detailed checklist is provided in
Table B-2 in the Appendices.
Operational considerations and studies for GAC specific to cyanotoxin removal:
• Consider media regeneration or replacement in routine maintenance schedules in preparation
for the summer season.
• Evaluate operational considerations associated with GAC use. For example, not adding chlorine
prior to the filters when they are in operation, as this affects adsorption capacity. Also, chlorine
will be reduced in the top portion (about one inch) of the GAC bed, and hence need to be
reapplied post-GAC filtration.
• If the GAC column is a filter adsorber, consider developing an adequate backwash procedure
and schedule so as to:
Minimize washing GAC out of the filter during backwash,
o
Allow a uniform GAC layer to set up after backwashing, and
o
Minimize caking of the GAC particles with particulates and any biological growth
o
present.
• Potentially, regeneration frequency could be based on the results of RSSCTs or ACTs conducted
using the GAC media utilized by the plant and cyanotoxin of concern.
• Filter maintenance and flow distribution are important. Ensuring even media depth throughout
the filter will mitigate preferential flow and potential breakthrough.
3.2.2 Membranes
Although rare in the drinking water industry in fresh water applications, the “tighter”, high-pressure
membranes, reverse osmosis (RO) and nanofiltration, are capable of removing extracellular cyanotoxins
by a combination of size exclusion and charge effects, depending on the cyanotoxin molecule being
removed. (AWWA, 2010). Operational considerations and studies for high-pressure membranes specific
to cyanotoxin removal are discussed below, and a more detailed checklist is provided in Table B-3 in the
Appendices.
Operational considerations for membranes specific to cyanotoxin removal:
• Because RO and nanofiltration can remove extracellular cyanotoxins, the concentrate stream of
these processes can have a high toxin retention level. Consider residual disposal issues that may
arise due to high cyanotoxin concentrations (AWWA, 2010).
3.2.3 Biofiltration
Studies have demonstrated that biodegradation of a variety of cyanotoxins, including microcystins,
nodularin, cylindrospermopsin, and anatoxin-a can occur in some situations. This is dependent on water
temperature, the abundance of specific bacteria capabable of degrading the cyanotoxins present, the
22
concentration of the target cyanotoxins, the presence of organic matter in the source water, and the
presence of metals in the source water. Studies have also shown that the biodegradation products of
saxitoxin may actually result in more toxic forms (Ho et al., 2012).
The most effective way for water treatment plants to utilize biodegradation for cyanotoxins is likely by
biological filtration processes, or biofiltration. Water treatment plants can consider if it is feasible to
modify existing sand or GAC filters to make them biologically active and able to host microorganisms
that are capable of degrading the cyanotoxins that are present in their source water (Ho et al., 2012).
Operational considerations for biofiltration specific to cyanotoxin removal:
• Many studies have documented a lag period prior to the onset of biodegradation of
cyanotoxins. This could be due to several reasons including time required for the population of
organisms capable of degradation of the cyanotoxins present to reach sufficient numbers, or
due to the time required for those organisms to induce the enzymes responsible for degradation
of the cyanotoxins. This lag time is a significant consideration for utilities faced with
cyanobacteria blooms that vary on short time periods.
• Both sand and GAC filters can be adapted to be biologically active, however some research
suggests that GAC may be preferred, as two removal mechanisms would be applicable
(adsorption and biodegradation). Refer to Section 3.2.1.2 on GAC for a discussion on the
adsorption component of cyanotoxin removal. GAC may also be a better substrate for bacterial
attachment than sand. Other types of media have shown promise for biofiltration in the
research, including glass beads, porous ceramic, and plastic media. Media characteristics such as
particle size, chemical composition, and roughness can influence the ability of the media to
establish biological growth and biodegradation of cyanotoxins (Ho et al., 2012).
• If saxitoxins are the predominant cyanotoxin present in the source water, biofiltration may not
be advisable, as research has demonstrated in some cases that the biodegradation products can
be more toxic than the original cyanotoxin.
• Other factors that influence the effectiveness of biofiltration are filter contact time and
hydraulic loading rate. Longer contact time and slower hydraulic loading rates may increase
biodegradation of cyanotoxins.
• Utilities considering biofiltration should consider that prechlorination should not be performed
prior to biological filtration processes. Carrying a chlorine residual onto the filters would impact
the bacterial population and decrease cyanotoxin biodegradation. This may affect this option’s
feasibility in certain water treatment plants.
• Certain organisms are capable of biodegradation of certain cyanotoxins. Even if a filter has an
active biofilm does not necessarily suggest that biodegradation of the specific cyanotoxins
present will occur. Some preliminary research suggests that seeding filters with organisms
capable of biodegrading the specific cyanotoxins present in a given source water may help to
minimize the lag period and potentially increase the biodegradation. However, thorough
analysis should be conducted prior to implementing this strategy to consider all potential
impacts on other treatment objectives and resulting impacts on water quality.
3.2.4 Oxidation
A variety of techniques exist for oxidation of cyanotoxins. The more common techniques, along with
their particular advantages and limitations, are described in Table 3-1 and the subsections below.
23
Table 3-1. General effectiveness of cyanotoxin oxidation with common water treatment
oxidants13
Oxidant Anatoxin-a Cylindrospermopsin Microcystins Saxitoxin
Chlorine Not effective Effective (at low pH) Effective* Somewhat
effective
Chloramine Not effective Not effective Not effective at Inadequate
normal doses information
Chlorine dioxide Not effective at Not effective Not effective at Inadequate
normal doses normal doses information
Potassium Effective Data ranges from Effective* Not effective
permanganate not effective to
possibly effective
Ozone Effective Effective Very effective Not effective
UV / advanced Effective Effective Effective at high Inadequate
oxidation UV doses* information
* Dependent on initial cyanotoxin concentration, pH, temperature, and presence of NOM.
3.2.4.1 Free chlorine
Research has demonstrated effective oxidation of microcystins and cylindrospermopsin by free chlorine
(AWWA, 2010; Walker, 2015). Free chlorine is generally ineffective against anatoxin-a (AWWA, 2010).
The effectiveness of free chlorine oxidation of microcystins and cylindrospermopsin is pH dependent. As
an example, Tables 3-2 and 3-3 show CT (chlorine concentration x contact time) values for microcystin-
LR and cylindrospermopsin, respectively, to achieve the EPA Health Advisory lower levels (levels for
infants to school-age children exposure, which are 0.3 µg/L and 0.7 µg/L, respectively) under varied pH,
temperature, and cyanotoxin concentrations. These tables were developed using AWWA’s Cyanotoxin
Tool for Oxidation Kinetics (CyanoTOX). AWWA’s stated purpose of the CyanoTOX tool is to “…provide
water utilities with a means to assess how changes in their existing treatment (e.g., pH, oxidant dose,
and contact time) will influence the degradation of specific cyanotoxins or groups of cyanotoxins.” As
with any tool or model, it is important to understand the limitations and assumptions of that tool prior
to its use (see footnote 12 at the bottom of page 20 for information on how to access this tool, which
also provides information about the tool’s limitations). Utilizing this spreadsheet tool, parameters such
as pH, temperature, cyanotoxin concentration, oxidant type (free chlorine, monochloramine, chlorine
dioxide, and ozone are available), a plant-specific baffling factor, and cyanotoxin type can be varied to
achieve a desired cyanotoxin target level. For this example, the results of which are shown in Tables 3-2
and 3-3, microcystin-LR and cylindrospermopsin targets were selected to correspond with the EPA
Health Advisories issued for these toxins, and initial toxin concentrations were varied at certain intervals
to provide the reader an idea of how the CT varies for free chlorine at various pH levels and
temperatures. Please note that this is only an example, and that effects for different source waters,
especially those containing compounds with competing oxidant demands, and different treatment may
result in different CT values than those presented in Tables 3-2 and 3-3.
Although effects for different waters may vary, the results from this example (Tables 3-2 and 3-3)
demonstrate that, particularly for microcystin-LR, the desirable pH range for the most efficient oxidation
13 Adapted with permission from Ohio AWWA and Ohio EPA’s “White Paper on Algal Toxin Treatment” (Ohio AWWA & Ohio
EPA, 2015).
24
with free chlorine is between 6 and 8. Some studies have shown that there is a risk of cell stress or lysis
and toxin release at pH below 6 (Newcombe, et al., 2015). Above a pH of 8, particularly for microcystins,
the resulting CT values may be unreasonably high, potentially resulting in plants exceeding the
maximum residual disinfectant level (MRDL) for free chlorine or necessitating potentially unreasonably
long contact times. Because this is a generic modeling example and there is no consideration for unique
water qualities or the exact suite of cyanotoxin congeners, a utility should perform a similar evaluation
for their own water quality with full understanding of the tool’s assumptions and limitations.
Table 3-2. Microcystin-LR CT table
(For free chlorine to achieve the lower level [school-age child exposure] of the EPA Health Advisory)
Toxin = Microcystin-LR
Oxidant = Free chlorine
Target = 0.3 µg/L
25
Table 3-3. Cylindrospermopsin CT table
(For free chlorine to achieve the lower level [school-age child exposure] of the EPA Health Advisory)
Toxin = Cylindrospermopsin
Oxidant = Free chlorine
Target = 0.7 µg/L
3.2.4.2 Ozone and advanced oxidation
Research has also demonstrated effective oxidation of microcystins and cylindrospermopsin by ozone
(AWWA, 2010; Walker, 2015). However, specific CT values have yet to be reported (AWWA, 2010) and
many factors play a role in ozone’s effectiveness, including pH, temperature, and concentration of NOM.
In addition, the formation of oxidation byproducts with the use of ozone, such as bromate, should be
considered. Advanced oxidation, such as ozonation at high pH, ozonation combined with hydrogen
peroxide (H O ), ferrous iron combined with hydrogen peroxide, or ultraviolet (UV) irradiation combined
2 2
with hydrogen peroxide, has proved to be effective at treating extracellular microcystins,
cylindrospermopsin, and anatoxin-a (AWWA, 2010).
3.2.4.3 Chlorine dioxide and chloramines
Chlorine dioxide and chloramines have not been found to be as effective as alternatives at oxidizing
certain cyanotoxins, including microcystins (AWWA, 2010; Walker, 2015).
For systems that use chloramines with minimal or no free chlorine contact time, advance HAB-response
planning is warranted because of the limited effectiveness of chloramines. For example, AWWA’s M57
Manual, “Algae: Source to Treatment” cites a study that dosed 30 mg/L of monochloramine with a
contact time of 5 days and was unable to degrade microcystins, with similar results for
cylindrospermopsin.
26
3.2.4.4 Potassium permanganate
Research indicates that potassium permanganate (KMnO ) is relatively effective against microcystin-LR
4
and anatoxin-a (pH independent for microcystins, pH dependent for anatoxin-a), while ineffective
against cylindrospermopsin. Studies using doses of approximately 1 mg/L have resulted in significant
microcystins reduction (AWWA, 2010; Walker, 2015). However when used as a pre-oxidant,
consideration should be given to the possibility of cyanotoxin release from cells. For example, some
studies have shown that potassium permanganate causes release of toxins from cyanobacteria cells,
especially at doses greater than 3 mg/L (Ou, et al., 2012), while other studies have shown limited to zero
toxin release at doses below 3 mg/L (Fan et al., 2013a, 2013b, 2014). The potential for permanganates
to cause release of cyanotoxins and other intracellular material may be at least partially dependent on
the type of cyanobacteria present, possibly because some cyanobacteria have more robust cell walls
that are more difficult to lyse.
Operational considerations and studies for oxidation technologies specific to cyanotoxin removal:
• Operational considerations and studies for oxidation technologies specific to cyanotoxin
removal are discussed below, and a more detailed checklist is provided in Table B-4 in the
Appendices.
• Consider what oxidants/disinfectants are available for use, their point of application, and any
competing technologies that would limit their effectiveness.
• As with any type of oxidant, consider the potential for formation of regulated disinfection
byproducts, total trihalomethanes (TTHMs) and haloacetic acids (HAA5s), bromate formation
(from ozone), and the potential for cyanotoxin oxidation byproducts (Health Canada, 2015).
• Advance planning for utilities using monochloramine could include temporarily moving the point
of ammonia addition further downstream in the treatment process train in order to allow more
contact time with free chlorine to oxidize extracellular toxins during a HAB. Plants in this
situation should consider evaluating the ability to move the point of ammonia addition and the
effects that change may have on other water treatment objectives.
Section 4: Implementing an optimization approach
This document, as well as other referenced resources, provides information that can be used
strategically for addressing HABs. However, the challenges associated with implementing change in a
treatment plant can be daunting. EPA’s CCP has successfully utilized the following guidelines for
implementing change in organizations since the inception of the program (U.S. EPA, 2004):
• Establish optimization goals that have the buy-in of utility staff and management.
• Create accountability by defining expectations of team members through clear roles and
responsibilities, documentation of meeting outcomes, and assignment of action items.
• Use data-based decision-making to gain support from utility staff and management for making
significant process changes (i.e., apply problem solving skills, such as tailored studies and data
trending and interpretation).
• Develop operational policies and procedures to enhance communication among utility staff and
management on critical activities (e.g., decision tree logic, when to sample for toxins,
monitoring protocols).
27
• Establish routine communication (e.g., meetings, data distribution, memorandums) to
continuously assess water system performance and provide a feedback loop.
Water utilities that apply this or a similar framework will likely have increased success in implementing
the strategies presented in this document.
Section 5: Conclusions
Increasing occurrence and detection of harmful algal bloom toxins in drinking water sources pose a
variety of challenges for water treatment plant managers and operators. Optimizing water treatment
processes for cyanotoxins, in conjunction with other water treatment objectives, can be daunting.
However, monitoring procedures and process control tools that are already in place at many plants can
be utilized for cyanotoxin treatment as well. A water treatment plant capable of optimization not only
consists of good design, but also has supportive administration/management and is well-operated and
maintained. A central theme to optimization for water treatment involves routine process monitoring
and applying process control tools and problem solving skills based on that monitoring data. Several
approaches to monitoring for cyanobacteria and resulting cyanotoxins were discussed. However, to
evaluate the efficacy of each unit process in the water treatment process train, regular monitoring,
especially during bloom seasons, is important throughout the plant. Water treatment plant operators
should consider monitoring at multiple locations in the process train, such as in source water, after rapid
mix, settled water, individual and combined filter effluent, or finished water. It is important to
understand which type of cyanotoxin is present and whether the cyanotoxins reside within the cell or as
extracellular because the optimal treatment approaches will differ. Plant optimization is never
“finished” – it is an ongoing process; therefore, utilities are encouraged to enhance or modify their
monitoring and treatment strategies as additional information becomes available through their regular
source water and process monitoring, and through keeping up to date on research in the drinking water
field.
28
References
Alvarez, M.B., Rose, J.B., and Bellamy, B. 2010. Treating Algal Toxins Using Oxidation, Adsorption, and
Membrane Technologies. Water Research Foundation.
American Water Works Association (AWWA). 2010. Algae: Source to Treatment, Manual of Water
Supply Practices M57. First Edition. Denver, CO.
American Water Works Association (AWWA). 2011. Operational Control of Coagulation and Filtration
Processes, Manual of Water Supply Practices M37. 3rd edition. Denver, CO.
American Water Works Association (AWWA) and Water Research Foundation (WRF). 2015. A Water
Utility Manager's Guide to Cyanotoxins. American Water Works Association. Denver, CO.
American Water Works Association Ohio Section Technology Committee (Ohio AWWA) and Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency (Ohio EPA). August 2015. Draft White Paper on Cyanotoxin
Treatment. Retrieved October 15, 2015 at
http://epa.ohio.gov/portals/28/documents/HAB/AlgalToxinTreatmentWhitePaper.pdf
Anderson, K., and Chescattie, E. 2003. Incorporating Filter Bed Expansion Measurements Into Your
Backwashing Routine. Water Quality Technology Conference. Philadelphia, PA: American Water
Works Association.
Brient, L., Lengronne, M., Bertrand, E., Rolland, D., Sipel, A., Steinmann, D., Baudin, I., Legeas, M., Le
Rouzic, B., and Bormans, M. 2008. A phycocyanin probe as a tool for monitoring cyanobacteria
in freshwater bodies. Journal of Environmental Monitoring. 10, 248-255. doi:10.1039/b714238b
Carmichael, W. 2000. Assessment of Blue-Green Algal Toxins in Raw and Finished Drinking Water.
AWWA Research Foundation and American Water Works Association (AWWA).
Chorus, I., and Bartram, J. ed. 1999. Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health
consequences, monitoring and management. World Health Organization.
Chow, C. W., Drikas, M., House, J., Burch, M. D., and Velzeboer, R. M. 1999. The impact of conventional
water treatment processes on cells of the cyanobacterium microcystis aeruginosa. Water
Research. 33(15), 3253-3262.
Dokulil, M.T. 2016. Vegetative survival of Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Cyanobacteria) at low
temperature and low light. Hydrobiologia. 764: 241-247. DOI: 10.1007/s10750-015-2228-y.
Drikas, M., Chow, C.W.K., House, J., Burch, M. 2001. Using coagulation, flocculation, and settling to
remove toxic cyanobacteria. Journal American Water Works Association (AWWA). February
2001, 100-111.
Fan, J., Daly, R., Hobson, P., Ho, L., Brookes, J. 2013a. Impact of potassium permanganate on
cyanobacterial cell integrity and toxin release and degradation. Chemosphere, 92, 529-534.
Fan, J., Ho, L., Hobson, P., Brookes, J. 2013b. Evaluating the effectiveness of copper sulphate, chlorine,
potassium permanganate, hydrogen peroxide and ozone on cyanobacterial cell integrity. Water
Research. 47, 5153-5164.
29
References Continued
Fan, J., Hobson, P., Ho, L., Daly, R., Brookes, J. 2014. The effects of various control and water treatment
processes on the membrane integrity and toxin fate of cyanobacteria. Journal of Hazardous
Materials. 264, 313-322.
Fischer, W.J., Garthwaite, I., Miles, C.O., Ross, K.M., Aggen, J.B., Chamberlin, A.R., Towers, N.R., Dietrich,
D.R. 2001. Congener-independent immunoassay for microcystins and nodularins. Environmental
Science & Technology. 35, 4849-4856.
Foss, A. J., and Aubel, M. T. 2015. Using the MMPB Technique to Confirm Microcystin Concentrations in
Water Measured by ELISA and HPLC (UV, MS, MS/MS). Toxicon.
doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2015.07.332.
He, X., Yen-Ling, L., Conklin, A., Westrick, J., Weavers, L.K., Dionysiou, D.D., Lenhart, J.J., Mouser, P.J.,
Szlag, D., Walker, H.W. 2016. Toxic cyanobacteria and drinking water: Impacts, detection, and
treatment. Harmful Algae. 54, 174-193.
Health Canada. 2002. Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water Quality: Supporting Documentation -
Cyanobacterial Toxins — Microcystin-LR. Federal-Provincial-Territorial Committee on Drinking
Water. Health Canada. Retrieved October 1, 2015, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-
semt/alt_formats/hecs-sesc/pdf/pubs/water-eau/cyanobacterial_toxins/cyanobacterial_toxins-
eng.pdf
Health Canada. 2015. Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water Quality: Guideline technical document for
public comment - Cyanobacterial toxins. Ottawa, Ontario: Water and Air Quality Bureau, Healthy
Environments and Consumer Safety Branch.
Henderson, R., Parsons, S. A., and Jefferson, B. 2008. The impact of algal properties and pre-oxidation on
solid-liquid separation of algae. Water Research. 42, 1827-1845.
Ho, L., Sawade, E., Newcombe, G. 2012. Biological treatment options for cyanobacteria metabolite
removal – A review. Water Research. 46, 1536-1548.
Holland, Daryl P. & Walsby, Anthony E. 2008. Viability of the cyanobacterium Planktothrix rubescens in
the cold and dark, related to over-winter survival and summer recruitment in Lake Zürich,
European Journal of Phycology. 43:2, 179-184, DOI: 10.1080/09670260801904822.
Kamp, L., Church, J.L., Carpino, J., Faltin-Mara, E., Rubio, F. 2016. The effects of water sample treatment,
preparation, and storage prior to cyanotoxin analysis for cylindrospermopsin, microcystin and
saxitoxin. Chemico-Biological Interactions. 246 45-51.
Karner, D.A., Standridge, J.H., Harrington, G.W., Barnum, R.P. 2001. Microcystin algal toxins in source
and finished drinking water. Journal American Water Works Association (AWWA). August 2001,
72-81.
Kasinak, J.E., Holt, B.M., Chislock, M.F., Wilson, A.E. 2015. Benchtop fluorometry of phycocyanin as a
rapid approach for estimating cyanobacterial biovolume. Journal of Plankton Research. 37(1):
248-257.
30
References Continued
National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) and Natural Resource Management Ministerial
Council (NRMMC). 2011. National Water Quality Management Strategy: Australian Drinking
Water Guidelines, version 3.2, updated February 2016, Canberra, Commonwealth of Australia.
Newcombe, G., Dreyfus, J., Monrolin, Y., Pestana, C., Reeve, P., Sawade, E., Ho, L., Chow, C., Krasner,
S.W., Yates, R. S. 2015. Optimizing Conventional Treatment for the Removal of Cyanobacteria
and Toxins. Water Research Foundation. Order Number 4315.
Newcombe, G., House, J., Ho, L., Baker, P., Burch, M. 2010. Management Strategies for Cyanobacteria
(Blue-Green Algae): A Guide for Water Utilities. CRC for Water Quality and Treatment - Research
Report No. 74. Water Quality Research Australia (WQRA).
New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission (NEIWPCC), HAB Workgroup, Control
Methods – BMP Focus Team. June 2015. Harmful Algal Bloom Control Methods Synopses.
Retrieved May 4, 2016.
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (Ohio EPA). November 2015. Ohio EPA Total (Extracellular and
Intracellular) Microcystins - ADDA by ELISA Analytical Methodology. Ohio EPA DES 701.0. Version
2.2. Retrieved April 28, 2016, from
http://www.epa.ohio.gov/Portals/28/documents/rules/draft/Ohio%20EPA%20DES%20701.0%2
0Version%202.2_Dec2015.pdf
Ohio EPA. July 2015. Public Water System Harmful Algal Bloom Response Strategy. Retrieved August 17,
2015 from: http://epa.ohio.gov/Portals/28/documents/HABs/PWS_HAB_Response_Strategy.pdf
Ohio EPA. March 2016. Generalized Cyanotoxin Treatment Optimization Recommendations. Retrieved
May 10, 2016 from:
http://epa.ohio.gov/Portals/28/documents/habs/Generalized%20Cyanotoxin%20Treatment%20
Optimization%20Recommendations.pdf
Ou, H., Gao, N., Chaohai, W., Yang, D., Qiao, J. 2012. Immediate and long-term impacts of potassium
permanganate on photosynthetic activity, survival and microcystin-LR release risk of Microcystis
aeruginosa. Journal of Hazardous Materials. 219-220, 267-275.
Robarts, R. D., and Zohary, T. 1987. Temperature effects on photosynthetic capacity, respiration, and
growth rates of bloom-forming cyanobacteria. New Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater
Research, 21:3, 391-399, DOI: 10.1080/00288330.1987.9516235.
Rosen, B.H., St. Amand, A. 2015. Field and laboratory guide to freshwater cyanobacteria harmful algal
blooms for Native American and Alaska Native Communities. U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)
Open-File Report 2015-1164. Available online at:
https://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2015/1164/ofr20151164.pdf
Ross, C., Santiago-Vásquez, L., and Paul, V. 2006. Toxin release in response to oxidative stress and
programmed cell death in the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa. Aquatic Toxicology. 78
(2006), 66-73. doi:10.1016/j.aquatox.2006.02.007.
31
References Continued
Source Water Collaborative (SWC). 2015a. Collaboration Toolkit: How to Build and Maintain Effective
Partnerships to Protect Sources of Drinking Water.
Schmidt, W., Petzoldt, H., Bornmann, K., Imhof, L., and Moldaenke, C. 2009. Use of cyanopigment
determination as an indicator of cyanotoxins in drinking water. Water Science & Technology.
59.8, 1531-1540.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA). 1997. Arar, E. J. and G. B. Collins. Method 445.0: In
Vitro Determination of Chlorophyll a and Pheophytin a in Marine and Freshwater Algae by
Fluoresence (Revision 1.2). National Exposure Research Laboratory, Office of Research and
Development. Cincinnati, OH. Available online at:
https://cfpub.epa.gov/si/si_public_record_report.cfm?dirEntryId=309417
U.S. EPA. 2004. Optimizing Water Treatment Plant Performance Using the Composite Correction
Program. EPA/625/6-91/027. Office of Water, Office of Research and Development. Cincinnati,
OH.
U.S. EPA. 2014. Cyanobacteria and Cyanotoxins: Information for Drinking Water Systems. EPA-
810F11001. Available online at: https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-
08/documents/cyanobacteria_factsheet.pdf
U.S. EPA. 2015a. Drinking Water Health Advisory for the Cyanobacterial Toxin Cylindrospermopsin. EPA
820R15101. Available online at: http://www2.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-
06/documents/cylindrospermopsin-report-2015.pdf
U.S. EPA. 2015b. Drinking Water Health Advisory for the Cyanobacterial Toxin Microcystin. EPA
820R15100. Available online at: http://www2.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-
06/documents/microcystins-report-2015.pdf
U.S. EPA. 2015c. Recommendations for Public Water Systems to Manage Cyanotoxins in Drinking Water.
EPA-815R15010. Washington, DC. Available online at:
http://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-06/documents/cyanotoxin-management-
drinking-water.pdf
U.S. EPA. 2015d. Health Effects Support Document for the Cyanobacterial Toxin Anatoxin-a. EPA
820R15104. Available online at: https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-
06/documents/anatoxin-a-report-2015.pdf
U.S. EPA. 2015e. Health Effects Support Document for the Cyanobacterial Toxin Cylindrospermopsin.
EPA 820R15103. Available online at: http://www2.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-
06/documents/cylindrospermopsin-support-report-2015.pdf
U.S. EPA. 2015f. Health Effects Support Document for the Cyanobacterial Toxin Microcystins. EPA
820R15102. Available online at: http://www2.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-
06/documents/microcystins-support-report-2015.pdf
32
References Continued
U.S. EPA. 2015g. Method 545: Determination of Cylindrospermopsin and Anatoxin-a in Drinking Water
by Liquid Chromatography Electrospray Ionization Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC/ESI-MS/MS).
EPA 815-R-15-009. Office of Water. Cincinnati, OH. Available online at:
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-11/documents/epa_815-r-15-
009_method_545.pdf
U.S. EPA. 2015h. Method 544. Determination of Microcystins and Nodularin in Drinking Water by Solid
Phase Extraction and Liquid Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC/MS/MS).
EPA/600/R-14/474. National Exposure Research Laboratory, Office of Research and
Development. Cincinnati, Ohio. Available online at:
https://cfpub.epa.gov/si/si_public_file_download.cfm?p_download_id=522920
U.S. EPA, 2016. Method 546. Determination of Total Microcystins and Nodularins in Drinking Water and
Ambient Water by Adda Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay. EPA 815-B-16-011. Office of
Water. Cincinnati, OH. Available online at: https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-
09/documents/method-546-determination-total-microcystins-nodularins-drinking-water-
ambient-water-adda-enzyme-linked-immunosorbent-assay.pdf
Usui, Y., and Kasubuchi, T. 2011. Effects of herbicide application on carbon dioxide, dissolved oxygen,
pH, and RpH in paddy-field ponded water. Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, 57, 1-6.
Usui, Y., Mowjood, M. I., and Kasubuchi, T. 2003. Absorption and Emission of CO2 by Ponded Water of a
Paddy Field. Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, 49 (6) 853-857.
Vlaski, A., van Breemen, A., and Alaerts, G. 1996. Optimisation of coagulation conditions for the removal
of microcystis aeruginosa by dissolved air flotation or sedimentation. J. Water SRT-Aqua, 45(5),
253-261.
Walker, H. W. 2015. Harmful Algae Blooms in Drinking Water: Removal of Cyanobacterial Cells and
Toxins. CRC Press. Boca Raton, FL.
33
Glossary
ADDA. 3-amino-9-methoxy-2,6,8-trimethyl-10-phenyldeca-4,6-dienoic acid. An amino acid that is part of
the microcystin molecule and is common to a majority of microcystin congeners.
Congener. Variants of similar molecules. For example, microcystin has five non-protein amino acids that
are typically constant between variants, and the molecule has positions for two protein amino acids
which can vary. These protein amino acids distinguish microcystin variants from each other. The
different microcystin molecules are called congeners.
CT. Concentration x contact time. A measure of oxidation requirement for inactivating or oxidizing a
contaminant.
MMPB. 3-methyloxy-2-methyl-4-phenylbutyric acid. An oxidation product of microcystin that can be
analyzed by LC/MS/MS. Shows promise as an analytical technique for total microcystin determination.
Microcystin. Sometimes abbreviated MC. Typically used in conjunction with its congener-specific amino
acids (e.g. MC-LA, MC-LF, MC-LR, MC-LY, MC-RR, and MC-YR). The two letters after MC denote the
specific amino acids (e.g. leucine and arginine = LR).
MIB. 2-Methylisoborneol. A common taste and odor chemical targeted by water treatment.
PCR. Polymerase chain reaction. A molecular DNA amplification technique that can be used to identify
cyanobacteria and toxin-producing genes within the cell.
UV . Water quality test to estimate organic material in drinking water samples; measurement is done
254
utilizing UV light at 254 nanometers (nm).
34
Appendix A: Process evaluation for treatment of intracellular toxins.
This appendix is intended for systems experiencing cyanobacteria blooms that have a significant portion of cyanotoxins in intracellular form. It
can be used as a planning tool, or by systems in the midst of a bloom. The best strategy for controlling cyanotoxins will be system specific, but
these tables can be used as a starting point to evaluate some common approaches. If the toxins are in both intracellular and extracellular form,
these tables can be used in conjunction with the tables in Appendix B: Process evaluation for treatment of extracellular toxins.
It is important to ensure that proper process control monitoring plans are in place prior to implementing any treatment approaches for
cyanotoxins, so that the impact and effectiveness of treatment can be assessed and informed treatment decisions can be made. Water
treatment plant staff can design process control monitoring plans for cyanotoxins to best fit their situation (e.g., grab samples and/or online
instruments depending on location, access, and availability of sampling ports). A good monitoring plan will include sampling for cyanotoxins if
detected in the source water; surrogate parameters, as discussed in Section II of the main document; and other process control parameters
specific to each technology (e.g., chemical dosing, feed rates, residuals, etc.).
It is also important to coordinate with the appropriate state or primacy agency prior to utilizing new or substantial changes in treatment in
regard to that state’s or primacy agency’s permitting requirements.
Table A-1. Conventional treatment facility
Can my conventional treatment facility (coagulation, flocculation, and sedimentation) remove cyanobacteria cells / intracellular toxins?
Step Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
1. Source water: Is an algaecide currently Evaluate ability to Continue to next step. This assumes that the
being added to the source water? cease adding Also, consider other algaecide will result in
algaecide to minimize source water control release of the toxins
toxin release (e.g., via strategies summarized (which research suggests
cell lysis or stress). in the Comments/Notes is likely). Prior
column. knowledge and frequent
monitoring of
intracellular and
extracellular toxin levels
will help determine the
importance of ceasing
algaecide application.
Although control
strategies in the source
A-1
Step Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
water will be system
specific, there are other
methods to reduce or
mitigate the impact of
cyanobacteria growth in
the source water that
may be applicable, such
as:
• Aeration to de-
stratify the
water column in
the vicinity of
the intake.
• Switching to
alternate intake
level that may
be less exposed
to cyanotoxins.
• Blending water
with another
source that is
not exposed to
cyanotoxins.
• Raw water
storage prior to
a HAB, in
anticipation of a
future HAB.
• If a bloom area
is limited to a
specific area or
intake structure,
consider bypass
A-2
Step Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
options (e.g.,
install
temporary
piping around
the intake area
or basin).
2 Pre-oxidation: Are pre-oxidants Evaluate ability to Continue to next step. Pre-oxidants are often
currently being added? cease adding pre- used for a variety of
oxidant or reduce the water treatment
dosage due to the objectives, such as
potential for turbidity, TOC, and
cyanotoxin release. manganese removal;
Ensure that other algae control in the
treatment objectives plant; or mussel control
that are satisfied by in intake lines. Advance
pre-oxidant can be planning allows one to
addressed. consider how these
objectives will be
affected if pre-oxidation
is stopped.
3 Coagulation/flocculation/clarification: Continue to next step. Review historical Optimized NOM removal
Has the optimal coagulant dose been dosages that may have (defined as lowest ΔC/C
0
determined for the potential/current been effective in for DOC and UV, and
cyanobacteria bloom? optimizing cyanotoxin color ≤ 0.05) resulted in
control during past optimized cyanobacteria
HABs, and conduct jar cell removal during jar
tests evaluating testing (Newcombe et
turbidity, NOM, UV254, al., 2015).
pigments, and color Jar testing may indicate
removal as surrogates that lower pH is needed
for cell removal (refer for effective cell
to the Operational removal. Monitor pH
considerations and
A-3
Step Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
potential studies and alkalinity to ensure
section of Section III.A optimized coagulation.
for more detailed See AWWA’s M37:
discussion). Operational Control of
Investigate the Coagulation and
effectiveness of an Filtration Processes for
alternate coagulant or information on jar
flocculant aid polymer testing; monitoring; and
during the HAB event. coagulation,
(These studies should flocculation, and
generally be performed clarification process
through jar testing information1.
when possible).
4. Filter run time/backwash: Have the Continue to next step. Consider impact of the
filter run time and filter backwash HAB on filter run time
disposal procedure been determined (i.e., will it be shortened
for the potential/current and what criteria will be
cyanobacteria bloom? used to initiate the
backwash?).
Assess the effectiveness
of the filter backwash
procedure for removing
cyanobacteria cells
(e.g., conduct studies
on bed expansion,
backwash waste water
turbidity profile, and
post-backwash filter
recovery).
1 American Water Works Association (AWWA). 2011. Operational Control of Coagulation and Filtration Processes: Manual of Water Supply Practices M37. 3rd edition. Denver,
CO.
A-4
Step Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
Filter backwash disposal
may be impacted (i.e.,
increased volume and
contamination with
cyanobacteria cells).
How will this be
addressed?
Consider if the plant is
recycling filter
backwash water and if
the recycle flow can be
eliminated during the
HAB event.
5 Sludge management: Does the plant Continue to next step. Assess sedimentation
have capacity to handle additional basin sludge removal
production and removal of settling frequency and potential
basin sludge, or alter sludge handling for toxin release from
practices (i.e., sludge recycling)? the sludge blanket.
Determine the plant’s
capability for disposal of
more frequent and
increased amounts of
sedimentation basin
sludge.
If applicable, assess
operational and
disposal implications of
ceasing sludge recycling
during a bloom.
6 Filter Performance: Are the filters Continue using Evaluate filter
optimized for turbidity removal (i.e. ≤ conventional operational parameters
0.10 NTU in 95% of turbidity samples)? treatment to remove with a goal to minimize
effluent turbidity. For
A-5
Step Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
intracellular example, see AWWA’s
cyanotoxins. M37: Operational
Control of Coagulation
and Filtration
Processes2 for
information on
monitoring and process
control for filtration.
Assess the condition of
the filter media
including media depth.
Investigate the use of a
filter aid polymer during
the HAB event.
7. Continue monitoring for
cyanotoxins, reviewing
and trending data, with
diligence toward
treatment to maximize
cell removal and
minimize toxin release
in the plant. For
extracellular cyanotoxin
removal, see the tables
in Appendix B.
2 American Water Works Association (AWWA). 2011. Operational Control of Coagulation and Filtration Processes: Manual of Water Supply Practices M37. 3rd edition. Denver,
CO.
A-6
Table A-2. Membrane treatment process
Can my membrane treatment process (microfiltration [MF] or ultrafiltration [UF]) remove cyanobacteria cells / intracellular toxins?
Step Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
1. Performance: Does direct or indirect Short term: Can the Continue to next step.
integrity testing indicate any loss of membranes that
particle removal effectiveness (LRV, have lost integrity be
pressure decay, turbidity, particle counts)? cleaned/restored,
replaced, or
bypassed? If yes, go
to the next question.
Long term: Evaluate
if replacing the
affected modules is
warranted.
2. Concentrate disposal: Is the reject water Continue to next Consider developing an
being sent to a location that can handle step. alternative approach to
high cyanobacteria cell (and potentially handle the concentrate if
toxin) concentrations? there is concern for high
Note: if it is recycled and blended with cyanobacteria cell or
fresh feed water, this will result in higher cyanotoxin
cyanobacteria cell (and possibly toxin) concentrations.
loading on the membranes.
3. Membrane backwashing: can membranes Continue to next Assess options for more Backwash water will contain
be backwashed more frequently, if step. frequent backwashing. cyanobacteria cells. This may
needed? Initiate backwash based impact disposal practices.
Are backwashes initiated based on water on water quality or
quality, or some other membrane membrane performance
performance parameter? parameter.
4a. Membrane cleaning: Can membranes be Continue to next Initiate CIPs based on
cleaned more frequently, if needed? step. water quality or
Are clean-in-place (CIP) procedures that membrane performance
are initiated by water quality, or some parameters. Obtain a
sufficient quantity of
A-7
Step Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
other parameter in place, and are the chemicals to clean the
necessary chemicals available? membranes if needed.
4b. Cleaning solution disposal: Are increased Evaluate the capacity Continue to next step.
CIP and backwash cleanings anticipated as of the existing waste
a result of the HAB? disposal system to
handle the increase.
5. Membrane pre-treatment: Consider if Perform data-based Continue with using MF or For example, pre-treatment that
there a need to adjust pre-treatment studies to determine UF to remove intracellular may need adjustment could
processes during a HAB? the necessary toxins. include physical filters (pre-
adjustments. filtration – anticipate more
frequent cleaning during HAB)
and chemical feeds (if coagulants
are added to remove organics for
DBP control, the dose may need
to be adjusted to also remove
cyanobacteria – jar testing can
help optimize the coagulant
dose).
6. Continue monitoring for
cyanotoxins throughout the
process train, reviewing and
trending data, and with diligence
toward making treatment
adjustments to reduce
cyanotoxin concentrations in the
finished water and process train.
A-8
Appendix B: Process evaluation for treatment of extracellular toxins.
These tables (arranged by treatment technology) are intended for systems with cyanobacteria blooms that have a significant portion of the
cyanotoxins in extracellular form (i.e., outside the cell). The tables can be used as a planning tool, or by systems in the midst of a bloom. The best
strategy for controlling cyanotoxins will be system specific, but these tables can be used as a starting point to evaluate some common
approaches. Even if toxins are primarily intracellular, the tables in Appendix B can provide information on treatment for the fraction that exists
as extracellular toxins; the tables can also be used to address situations involving toxin release due to algaecide or pre-oxidation. The treatment
processes evaluated in Appendix B can be utilized in combination to increase the removal or destruction of cyanotoxins (particularly using post-
oxidation as outlined in Table B-4). For removal of intracellular toxins, refer to Section 3.1 and Appendix A: Process evaluation for treatment of
intracellular toxins for treatment considerations for intracellular toxins.
It is important to ensure that proper process control monitoring plans are in place prior to implementing any treatment approaches for
cyanotoxins, so that the impact and effectiveness of treatment can be assessed and informed treatment decisions can be made. Water
treatment plant staff can design process control monitoring plans for cyanotoxins to best fit their situation (e.g., grab samples and/or online
instruments depending on location, access, and availability of sampling ports). The monitoring plan should include sampling for cyanotoxins if
detected in the source water; surrogate parameters, as discussed in Section 2 of the main document; and other process control parameters
specific to each technology (e.g., chemical dosing, feed rates, residuals, etc.).
It is also important to coordinate with the appropriate state or primacy agency prior to utilizing new or substantial changes in treatment in
regard that state’s or primacy agency’s permitting requirements.
Table B-1. Powdered activated carbon (PAC)
Can my facility use PAC to treat extracellular cyanotoxins?
Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
1. PAC equipment: Continue to next step – for Is this a long-term strategy Document immediate and/or
Is PAC feed equipment currently in- both immediate (short- that warrants pursuing (i.e., longer-term equipment needs,
place, or could it be installed in a term) and longer-term possibly for the next bloom if applicable.
short period of time (i.e., 24-48 implementation of PAC. season)? New PAC feed equipment
hours)? If PAC feed equipment is should generally be piloted for
not available in short order, short periods of time prior to
other treatment strategies implementing on a full-time
should be considered for basis in order to understand the
removing extracellular plant’s response to the new
B-1
Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
toxins (see Section 3.2 in equipment and applied dosage
the document and the other rates.
tables in Appendix B for
alternative strategies).
2. PAC dose: Based on the anticipated Implement dosing protocol Use AWWA’s PAC calculator T&O compounds, NOM, and
influent cyanotoxin concentration, as determined and and jar testing protocol, the pre-oxidants such as
has the optimal PAC dose been continue to next step. activated carbon supplier’s permanganate and chlorine can
determined to achieve treatment recommendation, or affect activated carbon’s ability
objectives? primacy agency’s to remove extracellular
recommendation to cyanotoxins.
estimate an initial optimal Filter breakthrough of PAC fines
PAC dose. Follow up with may occur as the PAC dose is
process control monitoring increased. This may limit a plant
and dose adjustments to from feeding the recommended
optimize the removal of dose to achieve toxin removal
cyanotoxins (or surrogate targets. Consider approaches
parameters). for mitigating this response if it
occurs (e.g., adding a filter aid
polymer).
Is feeder capacity adequate for
higher feed rates necessary for
HABs? Coordinate with state
prior to utilizing new or
substantial changes in
treatment in regard to state’s
permitting requirements.
3. PAC type: Has the optimal type of Use optimal PAC as Determine optimal type of See discussion of carbon types
PAC for cyanotoxin adsorption been previously determined and PAC (i.e., as recommended in Section 3.2.1. Wood-based
identified? continue to next step. by manufacturer, evaluated carbon has been found to be
through jar testing, used by effective for cyanotoxins but
a neighboring system) and may not be as effective as other
any potential supply carbon types for T&O removal.
issues/limitations. A mixture of carbon types may
B-2
Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
be necessary to achieve all
treatment objectives during a
HAB.
4. PAC supply: Is an adequate supply of Take measures to ensure a Is this a long-term strategy Document immediate and/or
PAC on-hand? Can more be obtained continued adequate supply that warrants pursuing (i.e., longer-term chemical supply
quickly (i.e., 24-48 hours), if needed? for the duration of the HAB possibly for the next bloom needs, if applicable.
and continue to next step. season)? If yes, continue Consider storage/space needs
with this strategy. and safety in handling/storage.
If PAC supply is not
available in short order,
other treatment strategies
should be considered for
removing extracellular
toxins (see Section 3.2 in
the document and the other
tables in Appendix B for
alternative strategies).
5. PAC feed and locations: Are there Evaluate the next two Consider a different Ensure that adequate mixing of
locations in the plant that are questions for optimal approach to removing PAC can be provided.
practical for feeding PAC at the feed location. extracellular toxins (see
rate necessary to achieve the needed Section 3.2 in the document
dose? and the other tables in
Appendix B for alternative
strategies).
5a. PAC contact time: Can PAC be added Use optimal location as It may not be effective to See AWWA’s “PAC Calculator
in the plant to allow enough contact determined and continue use PAC. Consider for Cyanotoxin Removal”, to be
time for significant adsorption? Has to next step. alternative approaches for used in conjunction with the
this been tested? extracellular toxin removal AWWA Cyanotoxin PAC Jar
(see Section 3.2 in the Testing Protocols, to assist in
document and the other estimating an appropriate PAC
tables in Appendix B for dose (CT) during a HAB episode.
alternative strategies).
B-3
Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
5b. Pre-oxidation: Are pre-oxidants used Stop pre-oxidants, if Continue to next step. Pre-oxidants are often used for
that may affect PAC performance? possible. Pre-oxidants such a variety of water treatment
as permanganate and objectives, such as turbidity,
chlorine can affect TOC, and manganese removal;
activated carbon’s ability to algae control in the plant; or
remove extracellular mussel control in intake lines.
cyanotoxins, and activated Advance planning allows one to
carbon will reduce the consider how these objectives
oxidant concentration, will be affected if peroxidation
possibly rendering it is stopped. Consider whether it
ineffective as well. is practical to forego meeting
Evaluate if pre-oxidation some objectives (e.g., mussel
can be stopped and ensure control) for a short period of
that other treatment time while addressing the more
objectives satisfied by pre- immediate cyanotoxin issues.
oxidant can be addressed.
If not possible, consider
alternative approaches to
removing extracellular
toxins (see Section 3.2 in
the document and the
following tables in
Appendix B for alternative
strategies).
6. Residuals: Can the system handle Continue with using PAC to Estimate the quantity of
additional sludge from settling basins remove extracellular sludge to be produced
and more frequent filter cyanotoxins. under the PAC treatment
backwashes? scheme based on the
AWWA PAC calculator and
evaluate the sludge disposal
capacity of the plant. Can
these issues be addressed,
B-4
Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
or will this preclude the use
of PAC?
7. Continue monitoring for
cyanotoxins throughout the
process train, reviewing and
trending data, with diligence
toward making treatment
adjustments to reduce
cyanotoxin concentrations in
the finished water and process
train.
Table B-2: Granular activated carbon (GAC)
Can my facility use GAC to treat extracellular cyanotoxins?
Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
1. Empty Bed Contact Time (EBCT): Is there a Continue to next Short term: Because the Rapid small-scale column tests
GAC filter on line that has enough EBCT to step. implementation of a GAC (RSSCTs) or accelerated column
control a cyanotoxin event (filter adsorber technology takes a tests (ACTs) are tools for
or post-filter adsorber)? significant time to plan, evaluating adsorption capacity
permit, and construct; and EBCT for long-term
consider a different implementation studies.
approach to removing See Section 3.2.1.2 for discussion
extracellular toxins (see on GAC.
Section 3.2 in the
document and the other
tables in Appendix B for
alternative strategies).
Long term: Utilities
repeatedly affected by
cyanotoxins in their
source water may wish to
B-5
Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
consider adding GAC
filters as a long-term
solution. Several factors
such as plant design,
financial, and source
water quality play a role
in this decision.
2. Media life: Is there adequate adsorption Continue to next Can the GAC be replaced Media life will vary depending on
capacity remaining in the GAC? step. quickly? If yes, go to the numerous factors including
next question. If not, carbon type, source water quality,
consider a different length of prior operation, and the
approach to removing desired effluent water quality.
extracellular toxins (see RSSCTs and ACTs are effective
Section 3.2 in the tools for evaluating adsorption
document and the other capacity.
tables in Appendix B for
alternative strategies).
3. Backwashing: Are operational procedures Continue with using Develop backwashing
in place to backwash the GAC filter(s) and GAC for removing policies, which include
dispose of the backwash water on a more extracellular criteria for initiating a
frequent basis, if needed? cyanotoxins. backwash, and planning
for disposal of backwash
water.
4. Continue monitoring for
cyanotoxins throughout the
process train, reviewing and
trending data, and with diligence
toward making treatment
adjustments to reduce
cyanotoxin concentrations in the
finished water and process train.
B-6
Table B-3: High-pressure membranes (reverse osmosis [RO] and nanofiltration [NF])
Can my facility use high-pressure membranes (i.e., reverse osmosis [RO] or nanofiltration [NF]) to treat extracellular cyanotoxins?
Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
1 Membrane Type: Is there a membrane Continue to next Short-term: Because the This table is mainly intended to
system on line that can remove cyanotoxins step. implementation of a high- provide treatment considerations
(RO or NF)? pressure membrane for those systems that already
system takes a significant have RO or NF in place and are
time to plan, permit, and affected by a HAB. Given that RO
construct, consider a and NF tend to be expensive and
different approach to complex/resource-intensive,
removing extracellular systems will likely find that adding
toxins (see Section 3.2 in RO or NF membranes to their
the document and the facility is cost/resource-prohibitive
other tables in Appendix B
for alternative strategies).
Long-term: Assess if RO or
NF are feasible options for
cyanotoxin removal.
RO/NF could be a feasible
option if it helps meet
multiple other treatment
objectives.
2 Performance: Does the membrane exhibit Continue to next Can the membranes that
chemical rejections (salts, TOC, specific step. have lost integrity be
chemicals) that are indicative of cleaned/restored,
maintaining its original integrity? replaced, or bypassed? If
yes, go to the next
question. If not, consider
a different approach to
removing extracellular
toxins (see Section 3.2 in
the document and the
B-7
Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
other tables in Appendix B
for alternative strategies).
3. Concentrate disposal: Is the reject water Continue to next Develop an approach to
being sent to a location that can handle step. handle concentrate. If not
high cyanotoxin concentrations? possible, consider a
different approach to
removing extracellular
toxins (see Section 3.2 in
the document and the
other tables in Appendix B
for alternative strategies).
4a. Membrane cleaning: Can membranes be Continue to next Initiate CIPs based on
cleaned more frequently, if needed? step. water quality or
Are clean-in-place (CIP) procedures that are membrane performance
initiated by water quality, or some other parameters. Obtain a
parameter in place, and are the necessary sufficient quantity of
chemicals available? chemicals to clean the
membranes if needed. If
this cannot be done
before the membrane
fouls, consider a different
approach to removing
extracellular toxins (see
Section 3.2 in the
document and the other
tables in Appendix B for
alternative strategies).
4b. Cleaning solution disposal: Are increased Evaluate the capacity Continue with using RO or
CIP and backwash cleanings anticipated? of the existing waste NF for removing
disposal system to extracellular cyanotoxins.
handle the increase.
5. Continue monitoring for
cyanotoxins throughout the
B-8
Question If yes If no Comments/Notes
process train, reviewing and
trending data, and with diligence
toward making treatment
adjustments to reduce
cyanotoxin concentrations in the
finished water and process train.
Table B-4: Oxidation: Can my facility use oxidation to treat extracellular cyanotoxins?
The oxidants free chlorine, chloramine, permanganate, ozone and chlorine dioxide are covered in AWWA’s CyanoTOX tool for determining CT.
See Section III.B.3.0 for discussion on these and other oxidants, such as advanced oxidation processes (AOP). These tables focus on free chlorine
and chloramine due to their prevalence in the water treatment industry.
Step Question If yes If no Comments / Notes
1. Optimal oxidant and application point: Continue to question Continue to question 2.
Have studies been performed to determine 5.
the optimal oxidant and application
location?
2a. Primary disinfectant: Does the plant Continue and remain Continue to next step. See Section 3.2.4 for discussion on
currently use free chlorine as a primary mindful of other other oxidants, such as ozone,
disinfectant (i.e., to achieve CT)? treatment objectives permanganate, chlorine dioxide,
(e.g., moving the and advanced oxidation processes
point of chlorination (AOP).
to prior to removing
TOC may increase
DBP formation).
2b. Secondary disinfectant: Is chlorine used as Continue to next For systems that use See Section 3.2.4 for discussion on
the secondary disinfectant (i.e., for step. chloramine with other oxidants, such as ozone,
distribution system residual)? minimal/no free chlorine permanganate, chlorine dioxide,
contact time, advance and advanced oxidation processes
planning is important to (AOP).
best respond to HABs
because chloramines are
B-9
Step Question If yes If no Comments / Notes
generally not as effective
at oxidizing cyanotoxins.
See discussion in Section
3.2.4.3.
3. Oxidant feed systems: Is there access to Continue to next Short term: If there is not
equipment to feed oxidants within the step. enough time to obtain
next 24 hours? equipment, consider a
different approach to
treating extracellular
toxins (see Section 3.2 in
the document and the
other tables in Appendix B
for alternative strategies).
Long term: Assess if
additional oxidation is a
feasible option for
cyanotoxin removal.
Investigate types of
oxidants, equipment, and
feed locations.
4a. Practical feed location: Are there Evaluate the next Short term: If feed points
locations in the plant that are practical for two questions for cannot be added in time,
feeding oxidants? optimal location. consider a different
Consider possible approach to treating
unintended extracellular toxins (see
consequences Section 3.2 in the
related to feeding document and the other
oxidants (i.e., tables in Appendix B for
applying chlorine alternative strategies).
prior to TOC removal Long term: Assess if
may increase DBP additional oxidation is a
formation). feasible option for
cyanotoxin removal.
B-10
Step Question If yes If no Comments / Notes
Investigate types of
oxidants, equipment, and
feed locations.
4b. Contact time: Have the locations that Use optimal location Identify and utilize a feed AWWA’s CyanoTOX tool can be
provide sufficient contact time been as previously location that maximizes used to estimate CT for
evaluated? determined contact time and that cyanotoxins. See Section 3.2.4 for a
doesn’t compromise more detailed discussion.
other treatment
objectives (e.g., increase
DBP formation).
5. Oxidant dose: Based on influent Continue to next Use AWWA’s CyanoTOX
concentration, pH, and previous step. tool (which can estimate
experience, has the optimal oxidant dose CT for cyanotoxins) or
been determined? follow state’s
recommendation to
estimate optimal oxidant
dose. Further process
control monitoring of
cyanotoxins (or surrogate
parameters) can help to
determine the optimal
dose.
6. Unintended consequences: Are there any Consider adjusting Continue to next step.
technologies currently used in the plant the planned
(e.g., PAC, GAC, membranes) that would be oxidation approach
detrimentally impacted by enhancing the to avoid unintended
use of oxidation? consequences, or
consider another
approach to treating
extracellular toxins if
unable to adjust.
B-11
Step Question If yes If no Comments / Notes
7. Oxidant supply: Is there an adequate Begin oxidant dosing, Short term: If time allows
supply of the oxidant to deliver it at the at optimal dose and during the current HAB,
intended dose? location as previously purchase oxidant.
determined Long term: Plan for future
HABs by ensuring
adequate supply of
desired oxidants prior to
bloom season.
8. Continue monitoring for
cyanotoxins throughout the
process train, reviewing and
trending data, and with diligence
toward making treatment
adjustments to reduce cyanotoxin
concentrations in the finished
water and process train.
B-12