Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water:
A guide to their public health consequences,
monitoring and management
Edited by Ingrid Chorus and Jamie Bartram
E & FN Spon
An imprint of Routledge
London and New York
First published 1999 by E & FN Spon, an imprint of Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
© 1999 WHO
Printed and bound in Great Britain by
St Edmundsbury Press, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any
form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented,
including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publishers.
The publisher makes no representation, express or implied, with regard to the accuracy
of the information contained in this book and cannot accept any legal responsibility or
liability for any errors or omissions that may be made.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested.
ISBN 0-419-23930-8
Also available from E & FN Spon
Agricultural Pollution
M. Redman
Determination of Organic Compounds in Natural and Treated Waters
T.R. Crompton
Ecological Effects of Waste Water, 2nd edition
Applied limnology and pollutant effects
E.B. Welch
Integrated Approaches to Water Pollution Problems
Edited by J. Bau, J.D. Henriques, J. de Oliviera Raposo and J.P. Lobo Ferreira
International River Water Quality
Pollution and restoration
Edited by G. Best, E. Niemirycz and T. Bogacka
Microbiology and Chemistry for Environmental Scientists and Engineers
J.N. Lester and J.W. Birkett
The Coliform Index and Waterborne Disease
Problems of microbial drinking water assessment
C. Gleeson and N. Gray
Water and the Environment
Innovative issues in irrigation and drainage
Edited by L.S. Pereira and J. Gowing
Water and Wastewater Treatment, Fourth edition
R. Bardolet
Water: Economics, management and demand
Edited by B. Kay, L.E.D. Smith and T. Franks
Water Policy
Allocation and management in practice
Edited by P. Howsam and R.C. Carter
Water Pollution Control
A guide to the use of water quality management principles
R. Helmer and I. Hespanhol
A Water Quality Assessment of the Former Soviet Union
Edited by V. Kimstach, M. Meybeck and E. Baroudy
Water Quality Assessments, 2nd edition
A guide to the use of biota, sediments and water in environmental monitoring
Edited by D. Chapman
Water Quality Monitoring
A practical guide to the design and implementation of freshwater quality studies and
monitoring programmes
Edited by J. Bartram and R. Ballance
Water Resources
Health, environment and development
Edited by B. Kay
Water Wells: Monitoring, maintenance, rehabilitation
Proceedings of the International Groundwater Engineering Conference, Cranfield
Institute of Technology, UK
Edited by P. Howsan
Ordering information
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
A Guide to their Public Health Consequences, Monitoring, and Management
published on behalf of WHO by:
F & FN Spon
11 New Fetter Lane
London EC4) 4EE
Telephone: +44 171 583 9855
Fax: +44 171 843 2298
Order online: http://www.earthprint.com
Table of Contents
Foreword
Acknowledgements
Chapter 1. Introduction
1.1 Water resources
1.2 Eutrophication, cyanobacterial blooms and surface scums
1.3 Toxic cyanobacteria and other water-related health problems
1.4 Present state of knowledge
1.5 Structure and purpose of this book
1.6 References
Chapter 2. Cyanobacteria in the environment
2.1 Nature and diversity
2.2 Factors affecting bloom formation
2.3 Cyanobacterial ecostrategists
2.4 Additional information
2.5 References
Chapter 3. Cyanobacterial toxins
3.1 Classification
3.2 Occurrence of cyanotoxins
3.3 Production and regulation
3.4 Fate in the environment
3.5 Impact on aquatic biota
3.6 References
Chapter 4. Human health aspects
4.1 Human and animal poisonings
4.2 Toxicological studies
4.3 References
Chapter 5. Safe levels and safe practices
5.1 Tolerable exposures
5.2 Safe practices
5.3 Other exposure routes
5.4 Tastes and odours
5.5 References
Chapter 6. Situation assessment, planning and management
6.1 The risk-management framework
6.2 Situation assessment
6.3 Management actions, the Alert Levels Framework
6.4 Planning and response
6.5 References
Chapter 7. Implementation of management plans
7.1 Organisations, agencies and groups
7.2 Policy tools
7.3 Legislation, regulations, and standards
7.4 Awareness raising, communication and public participation
7.5 References
Chapter 8. Preventative measures
8.1 Carrying capacity
8.2 Target values for total phosphorus within water bodies
8.3 Target values for total phosphorus inputs to water bodies
8.4 Sources and reduction of external nutrient inputs
8.5 Internal measures for nutrient and cyanobacterial control
8.6 References
Chapter 9. Remedial measures
9.1 Management of abstraction
9.2 Use of algicides
9.3 Efficiency of drinking water treatment in cyanotoxin removal
9.4 Chemical oxidation and disinfection
9.5 Membrane processes and reverse osmosis
9.6 Microcystins other than microcystin-LR
9.7 Effective drinking water treatment at treatment works
9.8 Drinking water treatment for households and small community supplies
9.9 References
Chapter 10. Design of monitoring programmes
10.1 Approaches to monitoring programme development
10.2 Laboratory capacities and staff training
10.3 Reactive versus programmed monitoring strategies
10.4 Sample site selection
10.5 Monitoring frequency
10.6 References
Chapter 11. Fieldwork: site inspection and sampling
11.1 Planning for fieldwork
11.2 Site inspection
11.3 Sampling
11.4 Nutrients, cyanobacteria and toxins
11.5 On-site analysis
11.6 Field records
11.7 Sample preservation and transport
11.8 References
Chapter 12. Determination of cyanobacteria in the laboratory
12.1 Sample handling and storage
12.2 Cyanobacterial identification
12.3 Quantification
12.4 Determination of biomass using chlorophyll a analysis
12.5 Determination of nutrient concentrations
12.6 References
Chapter 13. Laboratory analysis of cyanotoxins
13.1 Sample handling and storage
13.2 Sample preparation for cyanotoxin determination and bioassays
13.3 Toxicity tests and bioassays
13.4 Analytical methods for cyanotoxins
13.5 References
Foreword
Concern about the effects of cyanobacteria on human health has grown in many
countries in recent years for a variety of reasons. These include cases of poisoning
attributed to toxic cyanobacteria and awareness of contamination of water sources
(especially lakes) resulting in increased cyanobacterial growth. Cyanobacteria also
continue to attract attention in part because of well-publicised incidents of animal
poisoning.
Outbreaks of human poisoning attributed to toxic cyanobacteria have been reported in
Australia, following exposure of individuals to contaminated drinking water, and in the
UK, where army recruits were exposed while swimming and canoeing. However, the
only known human fatalities associated with cyanobacteria and their toxins occurred in
Caruaru, Brazil, where exposure through renal dialysis led to the death of over 50
patients. Fortunately, such severe acute effects on human health appear to be rare, but
little is known of the scale and nature of either long-term effects (such as tumour
promotion and liver damage) or milder short-term effects, such as contact irritation.
Water and health, and in particular drinking water and health, has been an area of
concern to the World Health Organization (WHO) for many years. A major activity of
WHO is the development of guidelines which present an authoritative assessment of the
health risks associated with exposure to infectious agents and chemicals through water.
Such guidelines already exist for drinking water and for the safe use of wastewater and
excreta in agriculture and aquaculture, and are currently being prepared for recreational
uses of water. In co-operation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO), United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and
the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), WHO is also involved in the long-term
monitoring of water through the GEMS/Water Programme; and in the monitoring of water
supply and sanitation services in co-operation with the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF). The World Health Organization supports the development of national and
international policies concerning water and health, and assists countries in developing
capacities to establish and maintain healthy water environments, including legal
frameworks, institutional structures and human resources.
The first WHO publication dealing specifically with drinking water was published in 1958
as International Standards for Drinking-Water. Further editions were published in 1963
and 1971. The first edition of WHO's Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality was
published in 1984-1985. It comprised three volumes: Volume 1: Recommendations;
Volume 2: Health criteria and other supporting information; Volume 3: Drinking-water
quality control in small-community supplies. The primary aim of the Guidelines for
Drinking-Water Quality is the protection of public health. The guidelines provide an
assessment of the health risks associated with exposure to micro-organisms and
chemicals in drinking water. Second editions of the three volumes of the guidelines were
published in 1993, 1996 and 1997 respectively and addenda to Volumes 1 and 2 were
published in 1998.
Through ongoing review of the Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality, specific micro-
organisms and chemicals are periodically evaluated and documentation relating to
protection and control of drinking-water quality is prepared. The Working Group on
Protection and Control of Drinking-Water Quality identified cyanobacteria as one of the
most urgent areas in which guidance was required. During the development by WHO of
the Guidelines for Safe Recreational-water Environments, it also became clear that
health concerns related to cyanobacteria should be considered and were an area of
increasing public and professional interest.
This book describes the present state of knowledge regarding the impact of
cyanobacteria on health through the use of water. It considers aspects of risk
management and details the information needed for protecting drinking water sources
and recreational water bodies from the health hazards caused by cyanobacteria and
their toxins. It also outlines the state of knowledge regarding the principal considerations
in the design of programmes and studies for monitoring water resources and supplies
and describes the approaches and procedures used.
The development of this publication was guided by the recommendations of several
expert meetings concerning drinking water (Geneva, December 1995; Bad Elster, June
1996) and recreational water (Bad Elster, June 1996; St Helier, May 1997). An expert
meeting in Bad Elster, April 1997, critically reviewed the literature concerning the toxicity
of cyanotoxins and developed the scope and content of this book. A draft manuscript
was reviewed at an editorial meeting in November 1997, and a further draft was
reviewed by the working group responsible for updating the Guidelines for Drinking-
water Quality in March 1998.
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water is one of a series of guidebooks concerning water
management issues published by E & FN Spon on behalf of WHO. Other volumes in the
series include:
Water Quality Assessments (D. Chapman, Ed., Second Edition, 1996)
Water Quality Monitoring (J. Bartram and R. Ballance, Eds, 1996)
Water Pollution Control (R. Helmer and I. Hespanhol, Eds, 1997)
It is hoped that this volume will be useful to all those concerned with cyanobacteria and
health, including environmental and public health officers and professionals in the fields
of water supply and management of water resources and recreational water. It should
also be of interest to postgraduates in these fields as well as to those involved in
freshwater ecology and special interest groups.
Acknowledgements
The World Health Organization wishes to express its appreciation to all those whose
efforts made the production of this book possible. Special thanks are due to the editors,
Dr Ingrid Chorus, German Federal Environmental Agency, Berlin, Germany, who co-
ordinated the development of the book and to Dr Jamie Bartram, Division of Operational
Support in Environmental Health, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland (formerly of the WHO
European Centre for Environment and Health, Rome, Italy), who managed the process
of preparing the manuscript.
An editorial advisory group assisted in guiding the development of this book, particularly
through co-ordination and review of specific sections. Special thanks are due to
Professor Wayne Carmichael, USA; Professor Geoffrey Codd, UK; Professor Ian
Falconer, Australia; Dr Gary Jones, Australia; Dr Tine Kuiper-Goodman, Canada; and Dr
Linda Lawton, UK, for their dedication and support.
An international group of experts provided material and, in most cases, several authors
and their collaborators contributed to each chapter. Because numerous contributions
were spread over several chapters it is difficult to identify precisely the contribution made
by each individual author and therefore the principal contributors are listed together
below:
Dr Sandra Azevedo, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (Box 4.3
and Section 5.3.1)
Dr Jamie Bartram, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland (Chapters 1 and 5-7)
Dr Lee Bowling, Department of Land and Water Conservation, Parramatta, New South
Wales, Australia (Chapter 7)
Dr Michael Burch, Cooperative Research Centre for Water Quality and Treatment,
Salisbury, South Australia, Australia (Chapters 5, 6, 9 and 10, Section 8.5.8)
Professor Wayne Carmichael, Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio, USA (Chapter 1,
Box 4.4 and Section 5.3.3)
Dr Ingrid Chorus, Institute for Water, Soil and Air Hygiene, Federal Environmental
Agency, Berlin Germany (Chapters 1, 5, 8, 10 and 12)
Professor Geoffrey Codd, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland (Chapters 5, 7 and
10, Section 8.5.8)
Dr Mary Drikas, Australian Water Quality Centre, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
(Chapter 9)
Professor Ian Falconer, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia (Chapters 4-7)
Dr Jutta Fastner, Institute for Water, Soil and Air Hygiene, Federal Environmental
Agency, Berlin, Germany (Chapter 11 and Figure 13.5)
Dr Jim Fitzgerald, South Australian Health Commission, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia (Chapter 4)
Dr Ross Gregory, Water Research Centre, Swindon, Wiltshire, England (Chapter 9)
Dr Ken-Ichi Harada, Meijo University, Nagoya, Japan (Chapter 13)
Dr Steve Hrudey, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada (Chapter 9)
Dr Gary Jones, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (Land
and Water), Indooroopilly, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia (Chapters 1, 3, 6 and 7,
Figure 5.1, Table 5.2, Box 8.3)
Dr Fumio Kondo, Aichi Prefectural Institute of Public Health, Nagoya, Japan (Chapter 13)
Dr Tine Kuiper-Goodman, Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (Chapters 4 and 5,
Box 6.1)
Dr Linda Lawton, Robert Gordon University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland (Chapters
12 and 13)
Dr Blahoslav Marsalek, Institute of Botany, Brno, Czech Republic (Sections 3.5.1 and
3.5.4, Chapter 12)
Dr Luuc Mur, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands (Chapters 2 and 8)
Dr Judit Padisák, Institute of Biology, University of Veszprém, Veszprém, Hungary
(Chapter 12)
Dr Kaarina Sivonen, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland (Chapter 3)
Dr Olav Skulberg, Norwegian Institute for Water Research, Oslo, Norway (Chapters 1
and 2, Figures 2.1 and 12.1, Box 7.5)
Dr Hans Utkilen, National Institute for Public Health, Oslo, Norway (Section 5.4, Chapter
11, Figure 13.2)
Dr Jessica Vapnek, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome,
Italy (Chapter 7)
Dr Yu Shun-Zhang, Institute of Public Health, Shanghai, China (Box 5.2)
Acknowledgements are also due to the following contributors: Dr Rainer Enderlein,
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UN ECE), Geneva, Switzerland (Box
7.4); Dr Michelle Giddings, Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (Box 6.1); Dr Nina
Gjølme, National Institute for Public Health, Oslo, Norway (Figures 2.3-2.5); Dr Rita
Heinze, Institute for Water, Soil and Air Hygiene, Federal Environmental Agency, Bad
Elster, Germany (Section 13.3.5); Dr Peter Henriksen, National Environmental Research
Institute, Roskilde, Denmark (Figure 3.4); Dr Elke Pawlitzky, Institute for Water, Soil and
Air Hygiene, Federal Environmental Agency, Berlin, Germany (Section 12.5.1); and Dr
Maria Sheffer, Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (Box 6.1).
The World Health Organization also thanks the following people, who reviewed the text:
Dr Igor Brown, Kiev, Ukraine; Dr Maurizio Cavalieri, Local Agency for Electricity and
Water Supply, Rome, Italy; Dr Gertrud Cronberg, Lund University, Lund, Sweden; John
Fawell, Water Research Centre, Medmenham, Buckinghamshire, England; Dr Gertraud
Hoetzel, La Trobe University, Wodonga, Victoria, Australia; Dr Jaroslava Komárková,
Hydrobiological Institute of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Ceské Budejovice, Czech
Republic; Dr Andrea Kozma-Törökne, National Institute for Public Health, Budapest,
Hungary; Dr Peter Literathy, Water Resources Research Centre (VITUKI), Budapest,
Hungary; Dr Gerry Moy, Programme of Food Safety and Food Aid, WHO, Geneva,
Switzerland; staff of the Norwegian Institute for Water Research, Oslo, Norway; and Dr
Stephen Pedley, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, England.
Thanks are also due to Dr Deborah Chapman, the series editor, for editorial assistance,
layout and production management, and to Ms Grazia Motturi and Ms Sylvaine Bassi, for
secretarial and administrative assistance. We are also grateful to Alan Steel for
preparation of illustrations, to A. Willcocks and L. Willcocks for typesetting assistance
and to Stephanie Dagg for preparation of the index.
Special thanks are due to the Ministries of Environment and Health of Germany and the
Institute for Water, Soil and Air Hygiene of the Federal Environmental Agency, Berlin,
which provided financial support for the book. The meetings at which the various drafts
of the manuscript were reviewed were supported by the Ministry of Health of Italy, the
States of Jersey and the United States Environment Protection Agency.
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health consequences,
monitoring and management
Edited by Ingrid Chorus and Jamie Bartram
© 1999 WHO
ISBN 0-419-23930-8
Chapter 1. INTRODUCTION
This chapter was prepared by Jamie Bartram, Wayne W. Carmichael, Ingrid Chorus,
Gary Jones, and Olav M. Skulberg
"A pet child has many names". This proverb is well illustrated by such expressions as
blue-greens, blue-green algae, myxophyceaens, cyanophyceans, cyanophytes,
cyanobacteria, cyanoprokaryotes, etc. These are among the many names used for the
organisms this book considers. This apparent confusion in use of names highlights the
important position that these organisms occupy in the development of biology as a
science. From their earliest observation and recognition by botanists (Linné, 1755;
Vaucher, 1803; Geitler, 1932), and onwards to their treatment in modem textbooks
(Anagnostidis and Komárek, 1985; Staley et al., 1989), the amazing combination of
properties found in algae and bacteria which these organisms exhibit, have been a
source of fascination and attraction for many scientists.
The cyanobacteria also provide an extraordinarily wide-ranging contribution to human
affairs in everyday life (Tiffany, 1958) and are of economic importance (Mann and Carr,
1992). Both the beneficial and detrimental features of the cyanobacteria are of
considerable significance. They are important primary producers and their general
nutritive value is high. The nitrogen-fixing species contribute globally to soil and water
fertility (Rai, 1990). The use of cyanobacteria in food production and in solar energy
conversion holds promising potential for the future (Skulberg, 1995). However,
cyanobacteria may also be a source of considerable nuisance in many situations.
Abundant growth of cyanobacteria in water reservoirs creates severe practical problems
for water supplies. The development of strains containing toxins is a common
experience in polluted inland water systems all over the world, as well as in some
coastal waters. Thus cyanobacterial toxins, or "cyanotoxins", have become a concern for
human health.
Prior to the first acute cyanotoxin poisoning of domestic animals documented in the
scientific literature (Francis, 1878), reports of cyanobacteria poisonings were largely
anecdotal. Perhaps one of the earliest is from the Han dynasty of China. About 1,000
years ago, General Zhu Ge-Ling, while on a military campaign in southern China,
reported losing troops from poisonings whilst crossing a river. He reported that the river
was green in colour at the time and that his troops drank from the green water (Shun
Zhang Yu, Pers. Comm.). Codd (1996) reported that human awareness of toxic blooms
existed in the twelfth century at the former Monasterium Virdis Stagni (Monastery of the
Green Loch), located near the eutrophic, freshwater Soulseat Loch near Stranraer in
south west Scotland. In more recent times, several investigators have noted that local
people in China, Africa, North and South America and Australia, who use water from
water bodies where green scums are present, will dig holes (soaks) near the water's
edge in order to filter the water through the ground and thus prevent the green material
from contaminating drinking-water supplies. This practice is similar to that of developing
wells next to surface waters in order to use the filtering capacity of the soil to remove
organisms and some chemicals from the surface waters - a technique known as
bankside filtration.
1.1 Water resources
The hydrological cycle represents a complex interconnection of diverse water types with
different characteristics, each subject to different uses. Recent developments have
shown the importance of water resource management in an integrated manner and of
recognising interconnections, especially between human activities and water quality.
Most of the world's available freshwater (i.e. excluding that in polar ice-caps, snow and
glaciers) exists as groundwater. This ready supply of relatively clean and accessible
water has encouraged use of this resource, and in many regions groundwater provides
drinking water of excellent quality. However, in some areas, geological conditions do not
allow the use of groundwater or the supplies are insufficient. Thus, where groundwater
supplies are insufficient or of unsuitable quality, surface water must be used for
purposes such as drinking-water supply. Compared with surface waters, groundwaters
have a high volume and low throughput. Over-abstraction is therefore common.
This book is concerned principally with inland, surface freshwaters, and to a lesser
extent with estuarine and coastal waters where cyanobacteria can grow, and under
suitable conditions, form water blooms or surface scums. Cyanobacteria are a frequent
component of many freshwater and marine ecosystems. Those species that live
dispersed in the water are part of the phytoplankton whilst those that grow on sediments
form part of the phytobenthos. Under certain conditions, especially where waters are rich
in nutrients and exposed to sunlight, cyanobacteria may multiply to high densities - a
condition referred to as a water bloom (see Chapter 2).
The composition of freshwaters is dependent on a number of environmental factors,
including geology, topography, climate and biology. Many of these factors vary over
different time scales such as daily, seasonally, or even over longer timespans. Large
natural variations in water quality may therefore be observed in any given water system.
Eutrophication is the enhancement of the natural process of biological production in
rivers, lakes and reservoirs, caused by increases in levels of nutrients, usually
phosphorus and nitrogen compounds. Eutrophication can result in visible cyanobacterial
or algal blooms, surface scums, floating plant mats and benthic macrophyte
aggregations. The decay of this organic matter may lead to the depletion of dissolved
oxygen in the water, which in turn can cause secondary problems such as fish mortality
from lack of oxygen and liberation of toxic substances or phosphates that were
previously bound to oxidised sediments. Phosphates released from sediments
accelerate eutrophication, thus closing a positive feedback cycle. Some lakes are
naturally eutrophic but in many others the excess nutrient input is of anthropogenic origin,
resulting from municipal wastewater discharges or run-off from fertilisers and manure
spread on agricultural areas. Losses of nutrients due to erosion and run-off from soils
may be low in relation to agricultural input and yet high in relation to the eutrophication
they cause, because concentrations of phosphorus of less than 0.1 mg l-1 are sufficient to
induce a cyanobacterial bloom (see Chapter 8).
Hydrological differences between rivers, impoundments and lakes have important
consequences for nutrient concentrations and thus for cyanobacterial growth. Rivers
generally have a significant flushing rate. The term "self-purification" was adopted to
describe the rapid degradation of organic compounds in rivers where turbulent mixing
effectively replenishes consumed oxygen. This term has been applied, mistakenly, to
any process of removing undesirable substances from water but does not actually
eliminate the contaminants, including processes such as adsorption to sediments or
dilution. Substances bound to sediments may accumulate, be released back into the
water, and may be carried downstream. This process is important for phosphorus. Lakes
generally have long water retention times compared with rivers, and by their nature lakes
tend to accumulate sediments and the chemicals associated with them. Sediments
therefore act as sinks for important nutrients such as phosphorus, but if conditions
change the sediments may also serve as sources, liberating the nutrient back into the
water where it can stimulate the growth of cyanobacteria and algae.
Surface water systems world-wide are now often highly regulated in efforts to control
water availability, whether for direct use in irrigation, hydropower generation or drinking
water supplies or to guard against the consequences of floods and droughts. Many
major rivers (such as the Danube in Europe or the Murray in Australia) may be viewed
as a cascade of impoundments. This trend in regulation of flow has an impact upon the
quality and the quantity of water. It alters sediment transport and, as a result, the
transport of substances attached to sediments, such as plant nutrients which may
enhance cyanobacterial growth. By increasing retention times and surface areas
exposed to sunlight, impoundments change the growth conditions for organisms and
promote opportunities for cyanobacterial growth and water-bloom formation through
modifications to river discharges. For many estuarine and coastal systems, human
impact on hydrological conditions and nutrient concentrations is also now extensive.
Figure 1.1 Schematic representation of the development of surface water pollution
with pathogens, oxygen-consuming organic matter, phosphorus and
cyanobacteria in north-western Europe and in North America
Changes in the nature and scale of human activities have consequences both for the
qualitative and quantitative properties of water resources. Historically, the development
of society has involved a change from rural and agricultural to urban and industrial water
uses, which is reflected in both water demands and water pollution as illustrated in
Figure 1.1. The general trend has been an increase in concentrations of pollutants in
surface waters together with increases in urbanisation. Construction of sewerage first
enhanced this trend by concentrating pollutants from latrines (which can leak into
groundwater or surface waters). After some decades, construction of sewage treatment
systems began extensively in the 1950s. Originally these systems comprised only a
biological step which degraded the organic material which otherwise had led to dramatic
oxygen depletion in the receiving water bodies. Pathogens were also reduced to some
extent, but phosphate remained unaffected. Upgrading treatment systems to remove
phosphorus only began in the 1960s and also had the side-effect of further reducing
pathogens. A resultant decline in eutrophication, and thus of cyanobacterial blooms, is
lagging behind the decline of phosphorus inputs to freshwaters because phytoplankton
growth becomes nutrient-controlled only below threshold concentrations (see Chapter 8).
It is unclear whether the historical shift in water demand from rural to urban will continue
in the future, although a number of influences are apparent. The anticipated food crises
of the early twenty first century will place increasing demands upon irrigated agriculture -
a process that already accounts for about 70 per cent of water demand world-wide. By
contrast, many industries have successfully developed processes with substantial water
economy measures, and their demand upon water resources per unit of activity is now
decreasing in some countries. Domestic water consumption tends to increase with
population and affluence, but development of lower consumption appliances and control
of losses from water mains may stabilise, or even reduce, demand in the future.
Nevertheless, overall trends point to an increasing total demand for water, driven
principally by global population growth.
1.2 Eutrophication, cyanobacterial blooms and surface scums
Eutrophication was recognised as a pollution problem in many western European and
North American lakes and reservoirs in the middle of the twentieth century (Rohde,
1969). Since then, it has become more widespread, especially in some regions; it has
caused deterioration in the aquatic environment and serious problems for water use,
particularly in drinking-water treatment. A recent survey showed that in the Asia Pacific
Region, 54 per cent of lakes are eutrophic; the proportions for Europe, Africa, North
America and South America are 53 per cent, 28 per cent, 48 per cent and 41 per cent
respectively (ILEC/Lake Biwa Research Institute, 1988-1993). Eutrophication also
affects slow flowing rivers, particularly if they have extended low-flow periods during a
dry season. Practical measures for prevention of nutrient loading from wastewater and
from agriculture have been developed. In some regions preventative measures are
being implemented more and more. During the 1990s, increasing introduction of nutrient
removal during sewage treatment in North America and in north western Europe has
begun to show success in reducing phosphorus concentrations; in a few water bodies,
algal and cyanobacterial blooms have actually declined. Technical measures for
reduction of nutrients already present in lakes are also available but have not been
widely applied (see Chapter 8).
Wherever conditions of temperature, light and nutrient status are conducive, surface
waters (both freshwater and marine) may host increased growth of algae or
cyanobacteria. Where such proliferation is dominated by a single (or a few) species, the
phenomenon is referred to as an algal or cyanobacterial bloom. Problems associated
with cyanobacteria are likely to increase in areas experiencing population growth with a
lack of concomitant sewage treatment and in regions with agricultural practices causing
nutrient losses to water bodies through over-fertilisation and erosion.
There are important differences in algal and cyanobacterial growth between tropical and
temperate areas. A characteristic pattern of seasonal succession of algal and
cyanobacterial communities is, for example, diatoms in association with rapidly growing
small flagellates in winter and spring, followed by green algae in late spring and early
summer, and then by species which cannot easily be eaten by zooplankton, such as
dinoflagellates, desmids and large yellow-green algae (in moderately turbulent waters
also diatoms) in late summer and autumn. In eutrophic and hypertrophic waters,
cyanobacteria often dominate the summer phytoplankton. As winter approaches, in most
water bodies, increasing turbulence and the lack of light during the winter leads to their
replacement by diatoms. In the tropics, seasonal differences in environmental factors are
often not great enough to induce the replacement of cyanobacteria by other
phytoplankton species. If cyanobacteria are present or even dominant for most of the
year, the practical problems associated with high cyanobacterial biomass and the
potential health threats from their toxins increase. High cyanobacterial biomass may also
contribute to aesthetic problems, impair recreational use (due to surface scums and
unpleasant odours), and affect the taste of treated drinking water.
Phosphorus is the major nutrient controlling the occurrence of water blooms of
cyanobacteria in many regions of the world, although nitrogen compounds are
sometimes relevant in determining the amount of cyanobacteria present. However, in
contrast to planktonic algae, some cyanobacteria are able to escape nitrogen limitation
by fixing atmospheric nitrogen. The lack of nitrate or ammonia, therefore, favours the
dominance of these species. Thus, the availability of nitrate or ammonia is an important
factor in determining which cyanobacterial species become dominant.
Cyanobacterial blooms are monitored using biomass measurements coupled with the
examination of the species present. A widely-used measure of algal and cyanobacterial
biomass is the chlorophyll a concentration. Peak values of chlorophyll a for an
oligotrophic lake are about 1-10 µg l-1, while in a eutrophic lake they can reach 300 µg l-1.
In cases of hypereutrophy, such as Hartbeespoort Dam in South Africa, maxima of
chlorophyll a can be as high as 3,000 µg l-1 (Zohary and Roberts, 1990).
Trophic state classifications, such as that adopted by the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD), combine information concerning nutrient status
and algal biomass (OECD, 1982). They provide a basis for the evaluation of status and
trends for management and they facilitate international information exchange and
comparison.
1.3 Toxic cyanobacteria and other water-related health problems
The contamination of water resources and drinking water supplies by human excreta
remains a major human health concern, just as it has been for centuries. By contrast, the
importance of toxic substances, such as metals and synthetic organic compounds, has
only emerged in the latter half of the twentieth century. Although eutrophication has been
recognised as a growing concern since the 1950s, only recently have cyanobacterial
toxins become widely recognised as a human health problem arising as a consequence
of eutrophication. The importance of such toxins, relative to other water-health issues,
can currently only be estimated. A significant proportion of cyanobacteria produce one or
more of a range of potent toxins (see Chapter 3). If water containing high concentrations
of toxic cyanobacteria or their toxins is ingested (in drinking water or accidentally during
recreation), they present a risk to human health (see Chapter 4). Some cyanobacterial
substances may cause skin irritation on contact.
The relationship between water resources and health is complex. The most well
recognised relationship is the transmission of infectious and toxic agents through
consumption of water. Drinking water has therefore played a prominent role in concerns
for water and human health. Diseases arising from the consumption of contaminated
water are generally referred to as "waterborne". Globally, the waterborne diseases of
greatest importance are those caused by bacteria, viruses and parasites, such as
cholera, typhoid, hepatitis A, cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis. Most of the pathogens
involved are derived from human faeces and the resulting diseases are generally
referred to as "faecal-oral" diseases; however they can also be spread by means other
than contaminated water, such as by contaminated food. Waterborne diseases also
include some caused by toxic chemicals, although many of these may only cause health
effects some time after exposure has occurred and may therefore be difficult to
associate directly with the cause.
The second major area of interaction between water and human health concerns its role
in personal and domestic hygiene, through which it contributes to the control of disease.
Because hygiene is a key measure in the control of faecal-oral disease, such diseases
are also "water hygiene" diseases. Other water hygiene diseases include skin and eye
infections and infestations, such as tinea, scabies, pediculosis and trachoma. All of
these diseases occur less frequently when adequate quantities of water are available for
personal and domestic hygiene. It is important to note that the role of water in control of
water hygiene diseases depends on availability and use, and water quality is therefore a
secondary consideration in this context.
"Water contact diseases" are the third group of water-related diseases and occur
through skin contact. The most important example world-wide is schistosomiasis
(bilharzia). In infected persons, eggs of Schistosoma spp. are excreted in faeces or urine.
The schistosomes require a snail intermediate host and go on to infect persons in
contact with water by penetrating intact skin. The disease is of primary importance in
areas where collection of water requires wading or direct contact with contaminated
surface waters such as lakes or rivers. The water contact diseases also include those
diseases arising from non-infectious agents in the water, that may give rise, for example,
to allergies and to skin irritation or to dermatitis.
The fourth principal connection between water and human health concerns "water
habitat vector" diseases. These are diseases transmitted by insect vectors that spend all
or part of their lives in or near water. The best-known examples are malaria (transmitted
by mosquito bites and caused by Plasmodium spp.) and filariasis (transmitted by
mosquito bite and caused by microfilaria).
The classification of water-related disease into four groups (waterborne disease, water
hygiene disease, water contact disease and water habitat vector disease) was originally
developed in order to associate groups of disease more clearly with the measures for
their transmission and control and has contributed greatly to furthering this
understanding. Because of its importance to the global burden of disease, the
classification is based upon infectious disease. Nevertheless, the principal groups of
diseases related to chemicals occurring in water may also be categorised in a similar
way. However, there are a number of water-health associations that fall outside these
categories. These include deficiency-related diseases and recreational uses of water.
For recreational water use, the principal area of concern relating to faecal-oral disease
transmission may be classified reasonably alongside other waterborne disease
transmission. However, concern related to transmission of, for example, eye and ear
infections does not readily fit into the classification system, nor does the increased
transmission of diseases arising from the effect of immersion compromising natural
defence systems (such as those of the eye).
Public health concern regarding cyanobacteria centres on the ability of many species
and strains of these organisms to produce cyanotoxins. Cyanotoxins may fall into two of
the four groups of water-related diseases. They may cause waterborne disease when
ingested, and water contact disease primarily through recreational exposure. In hospitals
and clinics, exposure through intravenous injection has led to human fatalities from
cyanotoxins (see Chapter 4). These toxins pose a challenge for management. Unlike
most toxic chemicals, cyanotoxins only sometimes occur dissolved in the water - they
are usually contained within cyanobacterial cells. In contrast to pathogenic bacteria,
these cells do not proliferate within the human body after uptake, only in the aquatic
environment before uptake.
Cyanotoxins belong to rather diverse groups of chemical substances (see Chapter 3),
each of which shows specific toxic mechanisms in vertebrates (see Chapter 4). Some
cyanotoxins are strong neurotoxins (anatoxin-a, anatoxin-a(s), saxitoxins), others are
primarily toxic to the liver (microcystins, nodularin and cylindrospermopsin), and yet
others (such as the lipopolysaccharides) appear to cause health impairments (such as
gastroenteritis) which are poorly understood. Microcystins are geographically most
widely distributed in freshwaters. Recently, they have even been identified in marine
environments as a cause of liver disease in net-pen reared salmon, although it is not
clear which organism in marine environments contains these toxins. As with many
cyanotoxins, microcystins were named after the first organism found to produce them,
Microcystis aeruginosa, but later studies also showed their occurrence in other
cyanobacterial genera.
The hazard to human health caused by cyanotoxins can be estimated from toxicological
knowledge (see section 4.2) in combination with information on their occurrence (see
section 3.2). However, although the information clearly indicates hazards, there are few
documented cases of human illness unequivocally attributed to cyanotoxins (see section
4.1). In a number of cases, investigation of cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins was carried
out only several days after patients had been exposed and had developed symptoms.
This was because diagnosis moved on to considering cyanobacteria only after other
potential causative agents had proved negative, or even years later when knowledge of
cyanobacterial blooms in a water body was connected with the information on an
outbreak of symptoms of unidentified cause.
The number of quantitative surveys on cyanotoxin occurrence is low, and the level of
cyanotoxin exposure through drinking water or during recreational activities largely
unknown. Surveys on cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins have been primarily ecological and
biogeographical. Early surveys in a number of countries including Australia, Canada,
Finland, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, the UK and the USA involved toxicity testing of
scum samples by mouse bioassay. Surveys during the 1990s have tended to employ
more sensitive and definitive methods for characterisation of the toxins, such as
chromatographic or immunological methods (see Chapter 3). These studies provide an
improving basis for estimating the range of concentrations to be expected in a given
water body and season. However, monitoring cyanotoxin concentration is more difficult
than many other waterborne disease agents, because variations in cyanobacterial
quantities, in time and space, is substantial, particularly if scum-forming species are
dominant (see section 2.2). Wind-driven accumulations and distribution of surface scums
can result in concentrations of the toxin by a factor of 1,000 or more (or even result in
the beaching of scums) and such situations can change within very short time periods,
i.e. the range of hours. Therefore, discontinuous samples only provide a fragmentary
insight into the potential cyanotoxin dose for occasional swimmers and into the amount
entering drinking water intakes.
Very few studies of cyanotoxin removal by drinking water treatment processes have
been published (see Chapter 9), although some water companies have carried out
unpublished studies. Thus, a reliable basis for estimation of cyanotoxin exposure
through drinking water is lacking. In regions using surface waters affected with
cyanobacteria as a source for drinking water, actual toxin exposure will depend strongly
on method of water abstraction and treatment.
In comparing the available indications of hazards from cyanotoxins with other water-
related health hazards, it is conspicuous that cyanotoxins have caused numerous fatal
poisonings of livestock and wildlife, but no human fatalities due to oral uptake have been
documented. Human deaths have only been observed as a consequence of intravenous
exposure through renal dialysis. Cyanotoxins are rarely likely to be ingested by humans
in sufficient amounts for an acute lethal dose. Thus, cyanobacteria are less of a health
hazard than pathogens such as Vibrio cholerae or Salmonella typhi. Nevertheless, dose
estimates indicate that a fatal dose is possible for humans, if scum material is swallowed.
However, swallowing such a repulsive material is likely to be avoided. The combination
of available knowledge on chronic toxicity mechanisms (such as cumulative liver
damage and tumour promotion by microcystins) with that on ambient concentrations
occurring under some environmental conditions, shows that chronic human injury from
some cyanotoxins is likely, particularly if exposure is frequent or prolonged at high
concentrations.
1.4 Present state of knowledge
Research into developing further understanding of the human health significance of
cyanobacteria and individual cyanotoxins, and into practical means for assessing and
controlling exposure to cyanobacteria and to cyanotoxins, is a priority. A major gap also
lies in the synthesis and dissemination of the available information.
Information concerning the efficiency of cyanotoxin removal in drinking water treatment
systems is limited. Especially, simple, low-cost techniques for cyanobacterial cell
removal, such as slow sand filtration, should be investigated and developed further.
More information is also needed on the capability of simple disinfection techniques, such
as chlorine, for oxidising microcystins and cylindrospermopsin (Nicholson et at., 1994). If
this is found to be applicable, or if "conventional" treatments are found to be effective if
properly operated, these approaches would provide a practical tool for removing
cyanotoxins in many situations.
Whilst cyanobacterial blooms remain sporadic or occasional events, most emphasis is
still placed upon the protection of drinking water supplies through the preparation of
contingency plans and their activation when appropriate. Early warning systems and
predictive models can facilitate this and should be based upon available information on
the conditions leading to cyanobacterial bloom development and on occurrence,
localisation and movement of scums.
Epidemiological evidence is of particular value in determining the true nature and
severity of human health effects (and therefore the appropriate response) but is
generally lacking in relation to human exposures to cyanobacteria. The limited studies
undertaken to date in relation to recreational exposure require further substantiation.
Opportunistic studies into exposures through drinking water may provide further valuable
insights. Information from experimental toxicology also needs to be strengthened. In
particular, long-term exposure studies (of at least one year or longer) should be carried
out to assess the chronic toxicity of microcystins and cylindrospermopsins. Uptake
routes (e.g. through nasal tissues and mucous membranes) require further investigation.
Further systematic studies are also required into the suggested tumour-promoting
effects of some cyanotoxins, particularly in the dose range of potential oral uptake with
drinking or bathing water.
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) endotoxins from cyanobacteria pose a potential health risk for
humans, but knowledge of the occurrence of individual LPS components, their toxicology,
and their removal in drinking water treatment plants, is so poor that guidelines cannot be
set at present. Further bioactive cyanobacterial metabolites are also identified frequently
and the health significance of these requires investigation.
1.5 Structure and purpose of this book
The structure of this book follows a logical progression of issues as outlined in Figure 1.2.
Because of the lack of comprehensive literature in the field of cyanotoxins, this book
aims to give background information as well as practical guidance. Some parts of the
text will mainly be of interest to particular readers. Chapters 2 and 3 provide the
background for understanding the behaviour of cyanobacteria and their toxin production
in given environmental conditions. Chapter 4 reviews the evidence regarding health
impacts, primarily for public health experts establishing national guidelines or academics
identifying and addressing current research needs. Chapters 5-7 provide guidance on
safe practices in the planning and management of drinking water supplies and
recreational resorts. Readers who access the book with specific questions regarding
prevention of cyanobacterial growth or their removal in drinking water treatment will find
Chapters 8 and 9 of direct relevance. Guidance on the design and implementation of
monitoring programmes is given in Chapter 10, and Chapters 11-13 provide field and
laboratory methods for monitoring cyanobacteria, their toxins and the conditions which
lead to their excessive growth. As far as is possible, individual chapters have been
written to be self-contained and self-explanatory. However, substantial cross-referencing,
particularly between Chapters 10 to 13, requires that these chapters should be used
jointly. Where chapters call upon information presented elsewhere in the text, this has
been specifically noted.
Figure 1.2 Aspects of monitoring and managing toxic cyanobacteria in water as
discussed in the various chapters of this book
1.6 References
Anagnostidis, K. and Komárek, J. 1985 Modem approach to the classification system of
cyanophytes. 1 Introduction. Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl. 71, Algological Studies, 38/39, 291-
302.
Codd, G.A. 1996 Harmful Algae News. IOC of UNESCO, 15, 4, United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Paris.
Francis, G. 1878 Poisonous Australian lake. Nature 18,11-12.
Geitler, L. 1932 Cyanophyceae. In: L. Rabenhorst [Ed.] Kryptogamen-Flora. 14. Band.
Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft, Leipzig.
ILEC/Lake Biwa Research Institute [Eds] 1988-1993 Survey of the State of the World's
Lakes. Volumes I-IV. International Lake Environment Committee, Otsu and United
Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi.
Linné, C. 1753 Species Plantarum. Tom II, Stockholm, 561-1200.
Mann, N.H. and Carr, N.G. [Eds] 1992 Photosynthetic Prokaryotes. Biotechnology
Handbooks, Volume 6, Plenum Press, London, 275 pp.
Nicholson, B.C., Rositano, J. and Burch, M.D. 1994 Destruction of cyanobacterial
peptide hepatotoxins by chlorine and chloramine. Wat. Res. 28, 1297-1303.
Rai, A.N. 1990 CRC Handbook of Symbiotic Cyanobacteria. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
253 pp.
Rodhe, W. 1969 Crystallization of eutrophication concepts in North Europe. In:
Eutrophication, Causes, Consequences, Correctives. National Academy of Sciences,
Washington D.C., Standard Book Number 309-01700-9, 50-64.
Skulberg, O.M. 1995 Biophotolysis, hydrogen production and algal culture technology. In:
Y. Yürüm [Ed.] Hydrogen Energy System. Production and Utilization of Hydrogen and
Future Aspects. NATO ASI Series E, Applied Sciences, Vol. 295, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, 95-110.
Staley, J.T., Bryant, M.P., Pfennig, N. and Holt, J.G. [Eds] 1989 Bergey's Manual of
Systematic Bacteriology. Volume 3, Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore.
Tiffany, L.H. 1958 Algae. The Grass of Many Waters. Charles C. Thomas Publisher,
Springfield, 199 pp.
Vaucher, J.P. 1803 Historie des Conferves déau douce. Geneva.
OECD 1982 Eutrophication of Waters, Monitoring, Assessment and Control.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.
Zohary, T. and Roberts, R.D. 1990 Hyperscums and the population dynamics of
Microcystis aeruginosa. J. Plankton Res., 12, 423.
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health consequences,
monitoring and management
Edited by Ingrid Chorus and Jamie Bartram
© 1999 WHO
ISBN 0-419-23930-8
Chapter 2. CYANOBACTERIA IN THE ENVIRONMENT
This chapter was prepared by Luuc R. Mur, Olav M. Skulberg and Hans Utkilen
For management of cyanobacterial hazards to human health, a basic understanding of
the properties, the behaviour in natural ecosystems, and the environmental conditions
which support the growth of certain species is helpful. This chapter provides information
on how cyanobacteria are structured and the abilities which they posses that support
their proliferation in aquatic ecosystems.
2.1 Nature and diversity
2.1.1 Systematics
Plants and animals possess consistent features by which they can be identified reliably
and sorted into recognisably distinct groups. Biologists observe and compare what the
organisms look like, how they grow and what they do. The results make it possible to
construct systematic groupings based on multiple correlations of common characters
and that reflect the greatest overall similarity. The basis for such groupings is the fact
that all organisms are related to one another by way of evolutionary descent. Their
biology and phylogenetic relationships makes the establishment of systematic groupings
possible (Minkoff, 1983).
However, microbial systematics has long remained an enigma. Conceptual advances in
microbiology during the twentieth century included the realisation that a discontinuity
exists between those cellular organisms that are prokaryotic (i.e. whose cells have no
nucleus) and those that are eukaryotic (i.e. more complexly structured cells with a
nucleus) within the organisation of their cells. The microalgae investigated by
phycologists under the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN) (Greuter et
al., 1994) included organisms of both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cell types. The blue-
green algae (Geitler, 1932) constituted the largest group of the latter category. The
prokaryotic nature of these organisms and their fairly close relationship with eubacteria
made work under provisions of the International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria
(ICNB) (Sneath, 1992) more appropriate (Rippka et al., 1979; Waterbury, 1992).
The prevailing systematic view is that comparative studies of the genetic constitution of
the cyanobacteria will now contribute significantly to the revision of their taxonomy.
Relevant classification should reflect as closely as possible the phylogenetic
relationships as, for example, encoded in 16S or 23S rRNA sequence data (Woese,
1987). The integration of phenotypic, genotypic and phylogenetic information render
possible a consensus type of taxonomy known as polyphasic taxonomy (Vandamme et
al., 1996).
The names "cyanobacteria" and "blue-green algae" (Cyanophyceae) are valid and
compatible systematic terms. This group of micro-organisms comprises unicellular to
multicellular prokaryotes that possess chlorophyll a and perform oxygenic
photosynthesis associated with photosystems I and II (Castenholz and Waterbury, 1989).
2.1.2 Occurrence in nature
The majority of cyanobacteria are aerobic photoautotrophs. Their life processes require
only water, carbon dioxide, inorganic substances and light. Photosynthesis is their
principal mode of energy metabolism. In the natural environment, however, it is known
that some species are able to survive long periods in complete darkness. Furthermore,
certain cyanobacteria show a distinct ability for heterotrophic nutrition (Fay, 1965).
Cyanobacteria are often the first plants to colonise bare areas of rock and soil.
Adaptations, such as ultraviolet absorbing sheath pigments, increase their fitness in the
relatively exposed land environment. Many species are capable of living in the soil and
other terrestrial habitats, where they are important in the functional processes of
ecosystems and the cycling of nutrient elements (Whitton, 1992).
The prominent habitats of cyanobacteria are limnic and marine environments. They
flourish in water that is salty, brackish or fresh, in cold and hot springs, and in
environments where no other microalgae can exist. Most marine forms (Humm and
Wicks, 1980) grow along the shore as benthic vegetation in the zone between the high
and low tide marks. The cyanobacteria comprise a large component of marine plankton
with global distribution (Wille, 1904; Gallon et al., 1996). A number of freshwater species
are also able to withstand relatively high concentrations of sodium chloride. It appears
that many cyanobacteria isolated from coastal environments tolerate saline
environments (i.e. are halotolerant) rather than require salinity (i.e. are halophilic). As
frequent colonisers of euryhaline (very saline) environments, cyanobacteria are found in
salt works and salt marshes, and are capable of growth at combined salt concentrations
as high as 3-4 molar mass (Reed et al., 1984). Freshwater localities with diverse trophic
states are the prominent habitats for cyanobacteria. Numerous species characteristically
inhabit, and can occasionally dominate, both near-surface epilimnic and deep, euphotic,
hypolimnic waters of lakes (Whitton, 1973). Others colonise surfaces by attaching to
rocks or sediments, sometimes forming mats that may tear loose and float to the surface.
Cyanobacteria have an impressive ability to colonise infertile substrates such as volcanic
ash, desert sand and rocks (Jaag, 1945; Dor and Danin, 1996). They are extraordinary
excavators, boring hollows into limestone and special types of sandstone (Weber et al.,
1996). Another remarkable feature is their ability to survive extremely high and low
temperatures. Cyanobacteria are inhabitants of hot springs (Castenholz, 1973),
mountain streams (Kann, 1988), Arctic and Antarctic lakes (Skulberg, 1996a) and snow
and ice (Kol, 1968; Laamanen, 1996). The cyanobacteria also include species that run
through the entire range of water types, from polysaprobic zones to katharobic waters
(Van Landingham, 1982).
Cyanobacteria also form symbiotic associations with animals and plants. Symbiotic
relations exist with, for example, fungi, bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms and
angiosperms (Rai, 1990). The hypothesis for the endosymbiotic origin of chloroplasts
and mitochondria should be mentioned in this context. The evolutionary formation of a
photosynthetic eukaryote can be explained by a cyanobacteria being engulfed and co-
developed by a phagotrophic host (Douglas, 1994).
Fossils of what were almost certainly prokaryotes are present in the 3,450 million year
old Warrawoona sedimentary rock of north-western Australia. Cyanobacteria were
among the pioneer organisms of the early earth (Brock 1973; Schopf, 1996). These
photosynthetic micro-organisms were, at that time, probably the chief primary producers
of organic matter, and the first organisms to release elemental oxygen into the primitive
atmosphere. Sequencing of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) has given evidence that the
earliest organisms were thermophilic and thus able to survive in oceans that were
heated by volcanoes, hot springs and bolide impacts (Holland, 1997).
2.1.3 Organisation, function and behaviour
The structure and organisation of cyanobacteria are studied using light and electron
microscopes. The basic morphology comprises unicellular, colonial and multicellular
filamentous forms (Figure 2.1).
Unicellular forms, for example in the order Chroococcales, have spherical, ovoid or
cylindrical cells. They occur singly when the daughter cells separate after reproduction
by binary fission. The cells may aggregate in irregular colonies, being held together by
the slimy matrix secreted during the growth of the colony. By means of a more or less
regular series of cell division, combined with sheath secretions, more ordered colonies
may be produced.
Figure 2.1 Basic morphology of cyanobacteria
Unicellular, isopolar (Order: Chroococcales)
Pseudoparenchymatous (Order: Pleurocapsales)
Unicellular, heteropolar (Order: Chamaesiphonales)
Multicellular, trichal, heterocysts not present (Order: Oscillatoriales)
Multicellular, trichal, with branches, heterocysts present (Order: Stigonematales)
Multicellular, trichal, heterocysts present (Order: Nostocales)
A particular mode of reproduction, which may supplement binary fission, distinguishes
cyanobacteria in the order Chamaesiphonales and Pleurocapsales. In the
Chamaesiphonales exospores are budded off from the upper ends of cells. In the
second order, the principal mode of replication is by a series of successive binary
fissions converting a single mother cell into many minute daughter cells (baeocytes or
endospores).
Filamentous morphology is the result of repeated cell divisions occurring in a single
plane at right angles to the main axis of the filament. The multicellular structure
consisting of a chain of cells is called a trichome. The trichome may be straight or coiled.
Cell size and shape show great variability among the filamentous cyanobacteria.
Species in the order Oscillatoriales, with unseriated and unbranched trichomes, are
composed of essentially identical cells. The other orders with a filamentous organisation
(orders Nostocales and Stigonematales) are characterised with trichomes having a
heterogeneous cellular composition. Vegetative cells may be differentiated into
heterocysts (having a thick wall and hyaline protoplast, capable of nitrogen fixation) and
akinetes (large thick-walled cells, containing reserve materials, enabling survival under
unfavourable conditions). In the order Stigonematales, the filaments are often
multiseriated, with genuine branching. Both heterocysts and akinetes are present.
The only means of reproduction in cyanobacteria is asexual. Filamentous forms
reproduce by trichome fragmentation, or by formation of special hormogonia.
Hormogonia are distinct reproductive segments of the trichomes. They exhibit active
gliding motion upon their liberation and gradually develop into new trichomes.
In contrast to eukaryotic microalgae, cyanobacteria do not possess membrane-bound
sub-cellular organelles; they have no discrete membrane-bound nucleus; they possess a
wall structure based upon a peptidoglycan layer; and they contain 70 S rather than 80 S
ribosomes (Fay and Van Baalen, 1987; Bryant, 1994).
The photosynthetic pigments of cyanobacteria are located in thylakoids that lie free in
the cytoplasm near the cell periphery. Cell colours vary from blue-green to violet-red.
The green of chlorophyll a is usually masked by carotenoids (e.g. beta-carotene) and
accessory pigments such as phycocyanin, allophycocyanin and phycoerythrin
(phycobiliproteins). The pigments are embodied in phycobilisomes, which are found in
rows on the outer surface of the thylakoids (Douglas, 1994). All cyanobacteria contain
chlorophyll a and phycocyanine.
The basic features of photosynthesis in cyanobacteria have been well described
(Ormerod, 1992). Cyanobacteria are oxygenic phototrophs possessing two kinds of
reaction centres, PS I and PS II, in their photosynthetic apparatus. With the accessory
pigments mentioned above, they are able to use effectively that region of the light
spectrum between the absorption peaks of chlorophyll a and the carotenoids. The ability
for continuous photo-synthetic growth in the presence of oxygen, together with having
water as their electron donor for CO reduction, enables cyanobacteria to colonise a
2
wide range of ecological niches (Whitton, 1992). Phycobiliprotein synthesis is particularly
susceptible to environmental influences, especially light quality. Chromatic adaptation is
largely attributable to a change in the ratio between phycocyanin and phycoerythrin in
the phycobilisomes. Thus, cyanobacteria are able to produce the accessory pigment
needed to absorb light most efficiently in the habitat in which they are present.
Cyanobacteria have a remarkable ability to store essential nutrients and metabolites
within their cytoplasm. Prominent cytoplasmic inclusions for this purpose can be seen
with the electron microscope (e.g. glycogen granules, lipid globules, cyanophycin
granules, polyphosphate bodies, carboxysomes) (Fay and Van Baalen, 1987). Reserve
products are accumulated under conditions of an excess supply of particular nutrients.
For example, when the synthesis of nitrogenous cell constituents is halted because of an
absence of a usable nitrogen source, the primary products of photosynthesis are
channelled towards the synthesis and accumulation of glycogen and lipids.
Dinitrogen fixation is a fundamental metabolic process of cyanobacteria, giving them the
simplest nutritional requirements of all living organisms. By using the enzyme
nitrogenase, they convert N directly into ammonium (NH ) (a form through which
2 4
nitrogen enters the food chain) and by using solar energy to drive their metabolic and
biosynthetic machinery, only N , CO , water and mineral elements are needed for growth
2 2
in the light. Nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria are widespread among the filamentous,
heterocyst forming genera (e.g. Anabaena, Nostoc) (Stewart, 1973). However, there are
also several well documented examples of dinitrogen fixation among cyanobacteria not
forming heterocysts (e.g. Trichodesmium) (Carpenter et al., 1992). Under predominantly
nitrogen limited conditions, but when other nutrients are available, nitrogen fixing
cyanobacteria may be favoured and gain growth and reproductive success. Mass
developments (often referred to as "blooms") of such species in limnic (e.g. eutrophic
lakes, see Figure 2.2 in the colour plate section) and marine environments (e.g. the
Baltic Sea) are common phenomena world-wide.
Many species of cyanobacteria possess gas vesicles. These are cytoplasmic inclusions
that enable buoyancy regulation and are gas-filled, cylindrical structures. Their function
is to give planktonic species an ecologically important mechanism enabling them to
adjust their vertical position in the water column (Walsby, 1987). To optimise their
position, and thus to find a suitable niche for survival and growth, cyanobacteria use
different environmental stimuli (e.g. photic, gravitational, chemical, thermal) as clues.
Gas vesicles become more abundant when light is reduced and the growth rate slows
down. Increases in the turgor pressure of cells, as a result of the accumulation of
photosynthate, cause a decrease in existing gas vesicles and therefore a reduction in
buoyancy. Cyanobacteria can, by such buoyancy regulation, poise themselves within
vertical gradients of physical and chemical factors (Figures 2.3A and 2.3B). Other
ecologically significant mechanisms of movement shown by some cyanobacteria are
photomovement by slime secretion or surface undulations of cells (Häder, 1987; Paerl,
1988).
Figure 2.3A Vertical distribution of Anabaena sp. in a thermally stratified eutrophic
lake during bloom conditions
The presence of very small cells of cyanobacteria (in the size range 0.2-2 µm) has been
recognised as a potentially significant source of primary production in various freshwater
and marine environments. These cyanobacteria constitute a component of the
picoplankton in pelagic ecosystems. Cells can be recognised and estimates of their
abundance made by using epifluorescence microscopy (e.g. observing the orange
fluorescence due to phycoerythrin). The unicellular genus Synechococcus is one of the
most studied, and geographically most widely distributed, cyanobacteria in the
picoplankton. Toxigenic strains of Synechococcus have been reported (Skulberg et al.,
1993).
Figure 2.3B Vertical distribution of Planktothrix sp. in a thermally stratified meso-
oligotrophic lake during bloom conditions
2.1.4 Biological diversity
Although cyanobacteria probably evolved as a group of organisms about 2,000 million
years before the advent of eukaryotes, they comprise fewer taxa than eukaryotic
microalgae (Bisby, 1995). The concept of species in the cyanobacteria has, however, no
distinct boundaries. The situation is similar for most organisms, except for those that are
sexually reproductive. Depending on the classification system used, the number of
species recognised varies greatly. Based on the International Code of Botanical
Nomenclature the class Cyanophyceae, for example, contains about 150 genera and
2,000 species (Hoek et al., 1995).
Chemotaxonomic studies include the use of markers, such as lipid composition,
polyamines, carotenoids and special biochemical features. The resulting data support
the more traditional examinations of phenotypic and ecological characteristics.
Physiological parameters are conveniently studied using laboratory cultures (Packer and
Glazer, 1988).
The diversity of cyanobacteria can be seen in the multitude of structural and functional
aspects of cell morphology and in variations in metabolic strategies, motility, cell division,
developmental biology, etc. The production of extracellular substances and cyanotoxins
by cyanobacteria illustrates the diverse nature of their interactions with other organisms
(i.e. allelopathy) (Rizvi and Rizvi, 1992).
A molecular approach to the systematics of cyanobacteria may be most fruitful for
inferring phylogenetic relationships. Macromolecules, such as nucleic acids and proteins,
are copies or translations of genetic information. The methods applied involve direct
studies of the relevant macromolecules by sequencing, or indirectly by electrophoresis,
hybridisation, or immunological procedures (Wilmotte, 1994). Nucleic acid technologies,
especially the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), have advanced to the point that it is
feasible to amplify and sequence genes and other conserved regions from a single cell.
To date, 16S rRNA has given the most detailed information on the relationships within
the cyanobacteria (Rudi et al., 1997). However, the molecular results obtained should be
integrated with other characteristics as the base for a polyphasic taxonomy (Vandamme,
et al., 1996). A considerable morphological, as well as a genotypical, polymorphy exists
in the cyanobacteria, although as data from rRNA sequencing indicates they are
correlated to a high degree.
The phylogenetic relationship of cyanobacteria is the rationale behind the meaningful
systematic groupings. However, it is difficult to set up a system of classification that
serves both the everyday need for practical identification, and offers an expression of the
natural relationship between the organisms in question (Mayr, 1981). Meanwhile, it will
be necessary to use the available manuals and reference books to help in these
investigations and with the proper identification of the cyanobacteria. Table 12.1 shows
examples of how cyanobacteria with toxigenic strains are treated for determinative
purposes according to the prevailing classification systems.
Because they are photoautotrophs, cyanobacteria can be grown in simple mineral media.
Vitamin B is the only growth factor that is known to be required by some species.
12
Media must be supplemented with the essential nutrients needed to support cell growth,
including sources of nitrogen, phosphorus, trace elements, etc. Toxigenic strains of
cyanobacteria are deposited in international-type culture collections (Rippka, 1988;
Sugawara et al., 1993). Clonal cultures are distributed for research, taxonomic work and
teaching purposes.
2.1.5 Practical scope
The cyanobacteria have both beneficial and detrimental properties when judged from a
human perspective. Their extensive growth can create considerable nuisance for
management of inland waters (water supply, recreation, fishing, etc.) and they also
release substances into the water which may be unpleasant (Jüttner, 1987) or toxic
(Gorham and Carmichael, 1988). The water quality problems caused by dense
populations of cyanobacteria are intricate, many and various (Skulberg, 1996b) and can
have great health and economic impacts. As a consequence, the negative aspects of
cyanobacteria have gained research attention and public concern.
The properties that make the cyanobacteria generally undesirable are also the
qualifications for possible positive economic use. Blue-greens are the source of many
valuable products (Richmond, 1990) and carry promising physiological processes,
including light-induced hydrogen evolution by biophotolysis (Skulberg, 1994). Extensive
research has taken place in the relevant fields of biotechnology. Cyanobacteria may be
used for food or fodder because some strains have a very high content of proteins,
vitamins and other essential growth factors and vital pigments of interest can also be
produced (Borowitzka and Borowitzka, 1988). Cyanobacteria are also sources for
substances of pharmaceutical interest (such as antibiotics) (Falch et al., 1995). These
examples are only a few of the possible applications of cyanobacteria for economic
development and their exploitation is among the many challenges for biotechnology for
the next millennium. Also in this context, their secondary metabolites and health
relationships will become important.
2.2 Factors affecting bloom formation
Cyanobacteria have a number of special properties which determine their relative
importance in phytoplankton communities. However, the behaviour of different
cyanobacterial taxa in nature is not homogeneous because their ecophysiological
properties differ. An understanding of their response to environmental factors is
fundamental for setting water management targets. Because some cyanobacteria show
similar ecological and ecophysiological characteristics, they can be grouped by their
behaviour in planktonic ecosystems as "ecostrategists" typically inhabiting different
niches of aquatic ecosystems. A number of properties and reactions to environmental
conditions are discussed below in order to describe these ecostrategists and to aid the
understanding of their specific behaviour.
2.2.1 Light intensity
Like algae, cyanobacteria contain chlorophyll a as a major pigment for harvesting light
and conducting photosynthesis. They also contain other pigments such as the
phycobiliproteins which include allophycocyanin (blue), phycocyanin (blue) and
sometimes phycoerythrine (red) (Cohen-Bazir and Bryant, 1982). These pigments
harvest light in the green, yellow and orange part of the spectrum (500-650 nm) which is
hardly used by other phytoplankton species. The phycobiliproteins, together with
chlorophyll a, enable cyanobacteria to harvest light energy efficiently and to live in an
environment with only green light.
Many cyanobacteria are sensitive to prolonged periods of high light intensities. The
growth of Planktothrix (formerly Oscillatoria) agardhii is inhibited when exposed for
extended periods to light intensities above 180 µE m-2 s-1. Long exposures at light
intensities of 320 µE m-2 s-1 are lethal for many species (Van Liere and Mur, 1980).
However, if exposed intermittently to this high light intensity, cyanobacteria grow at their
approximate maximal rate (Loogman, 1982). This light intensity amounts to less than
half of the light intensity at the surface of a lake, which can reach 700-1,000 µE m-2 s-1.
Cyanobacteria which form surface blooms seem to have a higher tolerance for high light
intensities. Paerl et al. (1983) related this to an increase in carotenoid production which
protects the cells from photoinhibition.
Cyanobacteria are further characterised by a favourable energy balance. Their
maintenance constant is low which means that they require little energy to maintain cell
function and structure (Gons, 1977; Van Liere et al., 1979). As a result of this, the
cyanobacteria can maintain a relatively higher growth rate than other phytoplankton
organisms when light intensities are low. The cyanobacteria will therefore have a
competitive advantage in lakes which are turbid due to dense growths of other
phytoplankton. This was demonstrated in an investigation measuring growth of different
species of phytoplankton at various depths in a eutrophic Norwegian lake (Källqvist,
1981). The results showed that the diatoms Asterionella, Diatoma and Synedra grew
faster than the cyanobacterium Planktothrix at 1 m depth, while the growth rate was
about the same for all these organisms at 2 m depth. At the very low light intensities
below 3 m only Planktothrix grew. The ability of cyanobacteria to grow at low light
intensities and to harvest certain specific light qualities, enables them to grow in the
"shadow" of other phytoplankton. Van Liere and Mur (1979) demonstrated competition
between cyanobacteria and other phytoplankton. Whereas the green alga
(Scenedesmus protuberans) grew faster at high light intensities, growth of the
cyanobacterium (Planktothrix agardhii) was faster at low light intensities (Figures 2.4A
and 2.4B). If both organisms were grown in the same continuous culture at low light
intensity, Planktothrix could out-compete Scenedesmus (Figure 2.4A). At high light
intensities, the biomass of the green alga increased rapidly, causing an increase in
turbidity and a decrease in light availability. This increased the growth rate of the
cyanobacterium, which then became dominant after 20 days (Figure 2.4B). Although
cyanobacteria cannot reach the maximum growth rates of green algae, at very low light
intensities their growth rate is higher. Therefore, in waters with high turbidity they have
better chances of out-competing other species. This can explain why cyanobacteria
which can grow under very poor nutritional conditions (see section 2.2.4) often develop
blooms in nutrient-rich eutrophic waters.
Figure 2.4A Competition for light between a cyanobacterium and a green alga.
Growth rates of Planktothrix agardhii Gomont and Scenedesmus protuberans
Fritsch as a function of average light intensities at pH 8.0, 20 °C with continuous
illumination (Redrawn after Van Liere, 1979)
The light conditions in a given water body determine the extent to which the
physiological properties of cyanobacteria will be of advantage in their competition
against other phytoplankton organisms (Mur et al., 1978). The zone in which
photosynthesis can occur is termed the euphotic zone (Z ). By definition, the euphotic
eu
zone extends from the surface to the depth at which 1 per cent of the surface light
intensity can be detected. It can be estimated by measuring transparency with a Secchi
disk (see Chapter 11) and multiplying the Secchi depth reading by a factor of 2-3. The
euphotic zone may be deeper or more shallow than the mixed, upper zone of a thermally
stratified water body, the depth of which is termed the epilimnion (Z ) (Figure 2.5). Many
m
species of planktonic algae and cyanobacteria have little, or only weak, means of active
movement and are passively entrained in the water circulation within the epilimnion.
Thus, they can be photosynthetically active only when the circulation maintains them in
the euphotic zone. In eutrophic waters, phytoplankton biomass is frequently very high
and causes substantial turbidity. In such situations, the euphotic zone is often more
shallow than the epilimnion, i.e. the ratio Z /Z is < 1, and phytoplankton spend part of
eu m
the daylight period in the dark. Thus, the Z /Z ratio is a reasonable (and easy to
eu m
measure) approach to describing the light conditions encountered by the planktonic
organisms.
Figure 2.4B Competition for light between a cyanobacterium and a green alga.
Outcome of competition between Planktothrix agardhii Gomont and Scenedesmus
protuberans Fritsch in continuous cultures at two different light intensities and
dilution rates (Redrawn after Van Liere, 1979)
2.2.2 Gas vesicles
Many planktonic cyanobacteria contain gas vacuoles (Walsby, 1981). These structures
are aggregates of gas-filled vesicles, which are hollow chambers with a hydrophilic outer
surface and a hydrophobic inner surface (Walsby, 1978). A gas vesicle has a density of
about one tenth that of water (Walsby, 1987) and thus gas vesicles can give
cyanobacterial cells a lower density than water.
2.2.3 Growth rate
The growth rate of cyanobacteria is usually much lower than that of many algal species
(Hoogenhout and Amesz, 1965; Reynolds, 1984). At 20 °C and light saturation, most
common planktonic cyanobacteria achieve growth rates of 0.3-1.4 doublings per day,
while diatoms reach 0.8-1.9 doublings per day and growth rates of up to 1.3-2.3
doublings per day have been observed for single-celled green algae (Van Liere and
Walsby, 1982). Slow growth rates require long water retention times to enable a bloom
of cyanobacteria to form. Therefore cyanobacteria do not bloom in water with short
retention times. A. comprehensive overview of mechanisms determining the growth
rates of planktonic algae and cyanobacteria under different field conditions is available in
Reynolds (1997).
Figure 2.5 Vertical extension of the euphotic zone (Z ) in relation to depth of the
eu
epilimnion (Z ) in situations with different turbidity.
m
A. Euphotic zone is deeper than epilimnion;
B. Euphotic zone is not as deep as epilimnion. Secchi depth (Z ) is included as
s
rough measure of euphotic depth (Z ) (Z × 2.5 ≅ Z )
eu s eu
2.2.4 Phosphorus and nitrogen
Because cyanobacterial blooms often develop in eutrophic lakes, it was originally
assumed that they required high phosphorus and nitrogen concentrations. This
assumption was maintained even though cyanobacterial blooms often occurred when
concentrations of dissolved phosphate were lowest. Experimental data have shown that
the affinity of many cyanobacteria for nitrogen or phosphorus is higher than for many
other photosynthetic organisms. This means that they can out-compete other
phytoplankton organisms under conditions of phosphorus or nitrogen limitation.
In addition to their high nutrient affinity, cyanobacteria have a substantial storage
capacity for phosphorus. They can store enough phosphorus to perform two to four cell
divisions, which corresponds to a 4-32 fold increase in biomass. However, if total
phosphate rather than only dissolved phosphate is considered, high concentrations
indirectly support cyanobacteria because they provide a high carrying capacity for
phytoplankton. High phytoplankton density leads to high turbidity and low light availability,
and cyanobacteria are the group of phytoplankton organisms which can grow best under
these conditions.
A low ratio between nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations may favour the
development of cyanobacterial blooms. A comparison between the optimum N:P ratios
for eukaryotic algae (16-23 molecules N:1 molecule of P) with the optimum rates for
bloom-forming cyanobacteria (10-16 molecules N: 1 molecule P), shows that the ratio is
lower for cyanobacteria (Schreurs, 1992).
2.2.5 Population stability
While many planktonic algae are grazed by copepods, daphnids and protozoa,
cyanobacteria are not grazed to the same extent, and the impact of grazing by some
specialised ciliates and rhizopod protozoans is usually not substantial. Cyanobacteria
are attacked by viruses, bacteria and actino-mycetes, but the importance of these
natural enemies for the breakdown of populations is not well understood. Because they
have few natural enemies, and their capacity for buoyancy regulation prevents
sedimentation, the loss rates of cyanobacterial populations are generally low. Thus, their
slow growth rates are compensated by the high prevalence of populations once they
have been established.
2.2.6 Temperature
Maximum growth rates are attained by most cyanobacteria at temperatures above 25 °C
(Robarts and Zohary, 1987). These optimum temperatures are higher than for green
algae and diatoms. This can explain why in temperate and boreal water bodies most
cyanobacteria bloom during summer.
2.3 Cyanobacterial ecostrategists
The physiological properties of cyanobacteria discussed above vary between different
species. As a consequence, different "ecostrategists" inhabit different types of water
bodies. A preliminary approach to describing these ecostrategists, based on
ecophysiological laboratory work together with field observations (largely from north-
western Europe), is described below. This information may be useful for management,
because it helps to predict which cyanobacteria can be expected to occur under certain
conditions. Further development of this approach will be possible as more data on
occurrence of cyanobacteria under different growth conditions are collected from other
continents.
2.3.1 Scum-forming ecostrategists
During the vegetation period, a number of cyanobacteria develop large aggregates
(colonies) of coccoid cells or filaments which are not homogeneously distributed over the
water column. Important genera showing this development are Microcystis, Anabaena
and Aphanizomenon. At the water surface the rate of photosynthesis of the colonies is
high and the cells store large quantities of carbohydrates. Although the cells contain gas
vesicles, the heavy carbohydrates acts as ballast and induce sinking within the colonies.
According to Stoke's Law the sinking rate is dependent on the difference in density
between the water and the cells, and on the square of the colony size (d2). Large
colonies sink faster than small ones, and single cells hardly show any vertical migration.
By sinking, colonies move out of the euphotic zone into the deeper, dark water layers,
where they use their carbohydrates during respiration and synthesise new gas-vesicles
(Utkilen et al., 1985). They then become buoyant again and return to the euphotic zone.
Buoyancy regulation enables the colonies to position themselves in light conditions
which are optimal for their growth. A prerequisite is that the water body is not too
turbulent. During the night, all colonies may become buoyant and some of the population
may be accumulated on the water surface where they can be blown together by wind,
forming stable scums along downwind shores. Vertical movement by buoyancy
regulation is illustrated in Figure 2.6. The frequency of vertical migration is dependent
upon colony size.
In temperate regions, as temperatures decline in the autumn, photosynthesis becomes
more rapid than respiration, and the carbohydrate "ballast" is not consumed. The
colonies therefore sink to the bottom of the water body where they may survive the
winter, gradually consuming their carbohydrate stores by respiration or fermentation.
Cells which re-ascend from the bottom in the spring are unicellular or formed into very
small colonies. During this period Microcystis spp. is difficult to recognise in plankton
samples, and only becomes more conspicuous when the colonies increase in size
during early summer.
Buoyancy regulation can be a substantial advantage in competition with other
phytoplankton organisms. However, this type of regulation is only possible in water
bodies with a shallow euphotic zone in relation to the depth of vertical mixing (Z < Z ).
eu m
Therefore, in temperate climates, blooms of Microcystis spp. are found particularly in
water bodies deeper than 3 m, because the euphotic zone is likely to be substantially
more shallow than the mixed depth. However, even in shallow lakes, where they do not
have the competitive advantage of vertical migration, Microcystis spp. may become
dominant and form substantial blooms, as has been reported from Hungary, Australia,
and particularly from subtropical and tropical regions. Reynolds (1997) characterises
Microcystis spp. as notoriously and overwhelmingly dominant in some lakes of the lower
latitudes that exhibit diel stratification.
Figure 2.6 Effect of colony size on vertical movement of Microcystis aeruginosa
by buoyancy regulation (simulation). Colonies with diameters <20 µm scarcely
migrate, colonies with diameters <160 µm accomplish less than one migration per
day, and colonies up to 1,600 µm diameter can migrate down to 10 m depth and
back up to the surface three times per day
Many cyanobacteria cannot survive high light intensities over longer periods. This may
limit their distribution to more turbid, eutrophic ecosystems. However, Microcystis
species are less sensitive to high light intensities because buoyancy regulation enables
them to find light conditions that are optimal for their growth. This means that the
presence of Microcystis cannot be related strictly to the level of eutrophication. The
genus is therefore found in mesotrophic, eutrophic and in hypertrophic waters. However,
the amount of biomass that this species can attain depends on the level of
eutrophication. Most Microcystis blooms are found in lakes with an average summer
chlorophyll a concentration of 20-50 µg l-1 and a Secchi transparency of 1-2 m.
2.3.2 Homogeneously dispersed ecostrategists
This ecotype comprises filamentous species, such as Planktothrix (Oscillatoria) agardhii
and Limnothrix (Oscillatoria) redekei. These species are extremely sensitive to high light
intensities and do not form colonies (Reynolds, 1987). Because the filaments are quite
small, vertical migration by buoyancy regulation is less pronounced than their passive
entrainment by water circulation. Therefore, these species are homogeneously
dispersed throughout the epilimnion.
Figure 2.7 Distribution of phytoplankton in Lake Veluwe, The Netherlands,
showing an almost permanent bloom of cyanobacteria during the years 1978-83.
The dominant bloom of Planktothrix agardhii was only interrupted by periods of
ice cover (Redrawn from RIZA, 1996)
This type of ecostrategist is found in eutrophic and hypertrophic shallow lakes. Many
lakes with blooms of dispersed ecotypes have a depth of not more than 3 m and
chlorophyll concentrations of 50 µg l-1 and, in extreme cases, greater than 200 µg l-1. The
filaments are hardly grazed and do not sediment. Blooms of this type often lead to virtual
monocultures which can prevail year-round for many years (Figure 2.7). Population
dynamics in such lakes can be limited. In temperate regions, the autumn population can
even survive under ice in winter. In such situations, the spring population starts growth
with a relatively high density and thus has an advantage in competition with other
species (Visser, 1990). By causing high turbidity, these cyanobacterial populations
effectively suppress the growth of other phytoplankton species. Thus, the next summer
population establishes itself almost without any seasonal succession between different
species of phytoplankton. This high stability of the population precludes any
redistribution of phosphorus and nitrogen to other components of the ecosystem and this
can cause a resilience effect in lake restoration projects (see Chapter 8).
Figure 2.2A Micrograph of Figure 2.2B Micrograph of Anabaena
Planktothrix (Oscillatoria) agardhii lemmermannii
Figure 2.2C Micrograph of Figure 2.2D Surface bloom of Planktothrix
Microcystis aeruginosa (Oscillatoria)
Figure 2.2E Surface bloom of Figure 2.2F Aerial photograph with infrared
Microcystis colour film of a freshwater bloom of
cyanobacteria
Figure 2.2G Use of a barrier or boom to keep surface scums of algae and
cyanobacteria away from water offtake structures (Photograph courtesy of Peter
Baker, Australian Water Quality Centre)
2.3.3 Stratifying ecostrategists
Representatives of this ecotype develop stable summer populations in the intermediate
zone of thermally stratified lakes and reservoirs known as the metalimnion see (see
Figure 2.3). The organisms contain the red pigment phycoerythrin to absorb the green
light, which is the prevailing wave length at this depth. The most common of these
species is Planktothrix (Oscillatoria) rubescens, but red varieties of other Planktothrix
species can also form metalimnic populations (Aune et al., 1997).
The single filaments of these species hardly show any vertical migration. However, in
late autumn at the end of the growing season, the cells can become buoyant and then
form red surface scums (Walsby et al., 1983). The niche of this type of Planktothrix is
very limited. It needs sufficient light in the metalimnetic zone, but may be inhibited by too
much light. Most metalimnetic blooms are found at light intensities of 1-5 per cent of the
surface irradiance and in a range of Z /Z between 0.7 and 1.2.
eu m
2.3.4 Nitrogen fixing ecostrategists
The mass development of species capable of fixation of atmospheric nitrogen (species
of the genera Anabaena, Aphanizomenon, Cylindrospermopsis, Nodularia, and Nostoc)
can often be related to periodic nitrogen limitation. Examples are found in deep, as well
as in shallow, systems. However, while these ecostrategists often dominate in
ecosystems with low levels of inorganic dissolved nitrogen, the reverse does not
necessarily apply. Numerous lakes with clear nitrogen limitation are not dominated by
nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria. Low light availability may be the reason for this, because
nitrogen fixation requires high amounts of energy. In turbid lakes, insufficient light energy
may be available for effective nitrogen fixation (Zevenboom and Mur, 1980). A number of
nitrogen fixing species can form colonies and possess gas vesicles. This means that
they can regulate buoyancy, like Microcystis, and can form stable scums along
downwind shores.
Restoration measures which simultaneously reduce phosphate and nitrogen loading
(sewage diversion, isolation) may strengthen prevailing nitrogen-limiting conditions and
hence the probability of large populations of nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria.
2.3.5 Small, colony-forming taxa
Cases of large populations of the small, colony-forming genus Aphanothece have been
reported. Little information is available on buoyancy regulation and scum formation by
the species involved. In several water bodies, Aphanothece dominance has occurred
after a decrease of Planktothrix rubescens populations. Reynolds (1997) reported them
as the only cyanobacteria present in the summer plankton of small, intermittently flushed
lakes in England. The dominance of this group is not strictly related with phosphate or
nitrogen limitation, and there are no obvious relationships that can explain the sudden
dominance of these cyanobacteria. They seem to dominate in an intermediate state
during lake recovery after restoration measures have been taken; their ecology is
unknown.
2.3.6 Benthic cyanobacteria
Besides the planktonic ecostrategists described above, cyanobacteria may grow on the
bottom sediments of water bodies which are sufficiently clear to allow light penetration to
these surfaces. These benthic species may form coherent mats. Especially high rates of
photosynthesis by such mats sometimes leads to trapping of the photosynthetically
produced oxygen as bubbles within the mats; parts of the mats may then become
sufficiently buoyant to tear loose and rise to the surface. For monitoring and
management of toxic cyanobacteria, awareness of these is important because
cyanotoxin problems are usually not expected in clear, oligotrophic waters. However,
toxic benthic cyanobacteria have caused animal deaths in Scotland, where beached
mats along the shore of a clear loch were scavenged by dogs (Gunn et al., 1992), and in
Switzerland where toxic benthic populations of Oscillatoria limosa were ingested by
cattle drinking from pristine mountain lakes (Metz et al., 1997, 1998).
2.4 Additional information
It is beyond the scope of this book to give a detailed account of the taxonomy and
ecology of cyanobacteria. However, in addition to the references cited in the previous
sections of this chapter there are many useful texts that are widely available. Taxonomy
and species identification are covered in some detail by Anagnostidis and Komárek
(1985), Staley et al. (1989), Larsen and Moestrup (1990) and Waterbury (1992). Detailed
accounts of plankton ecology, including cyanobacteria, are available in Sommer (1989)
and Reynolds (1997) and cyanobacterial ecophysiology is described by Mur (1983).
2.5 References
Anagnostidis, K. and Komárek, J. 1985 Modem approach to the classification system of
cyanophytes. 1 Introduction. Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl. 71, Algological Studies, 38/39, 291-
302.
Aune, T., Ramstad, H., Skulberg, O.M., Underdal, B., Yndestad, M. and Østensvik, Ø.
1997 Cyanotoksiner og edelkreps - toksinproduserende blågrønnalger i Steinsfjorden
sommeren 1997. Norwegian Institute for Water Research, Oslo.
Bisby, F.A. 1995 Characterization of biodiversity. In: V.H. Heywood and R.T. Watson
[Eds] Global Biodiversity Assessment. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 21-106.
Borowitzka, M.A. and Borowitzka, L.J. 1988 Micro-algal Biotechnology. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 477 pp.
Brock. T.D. 1973 Evolutionary and ecological aspects of the cyanophytes. In: N.G. Carr
and B.A. Whitton [Eds] The Biology of the Blue-Green Algae. Blackwell Scientific
Publications, Oxford, 487-500.
Bryant, D.A. [Ed.] 1994 The Molecular Biology of Cyanobacteria. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, 879 pp.
Carpenter, E.J., Capone, D.G. and Reuter, J.G. [Eds] 1992 Marine Pelagic
Cyanobacteria: Trichodesmium and other Diazotrophs. NATO ASI Series C,
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Vol. 362. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
Castenholz, R.W. 1973 Ecology of blue-green algae in hot springs. In: N.G. Carr and
B.A. Whitton [Eds] The Biology of Blue-Green Algae. Blackwell Scientific Publications,
Oxford, 379-414.
Castenholz, R.W. and Waterbury, J.B. 1989 In: J.T. Staley, M.P. Bryant, N. Pfennig and
J.G. Holt [Eds] Bergey's Manual of Systematic Bacteriology. Vol. 3, Williams & Wilkins,
Baltimore, 1710-1727.
Cohen-Bazire, G. and Bryant, D.A. 1982 Phycobilisomes: composition and structure. In:
N.G. Carr and B.A. Whitton [Eds] The Biology of Cyanobacteria. Blackwell Scientific
Publications, Oxford.
Dor, I. and Danin, A. 1996 Cyanobacterial desert crusts in the Dead Sea Valley, Israel.
Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl. 117, Algological Studies, 83, 197-206.
Douglas, S.E. 1994 Chloroplast origins and evolution. In: D.A. Bryant [Ed.] The
Molecular Biology of Cyanobacteria., Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht. 91-118.
Falch, B.S., König, G.M., Wright, A.D., Sticher, O., Angerhofer, C.K., Pezzuto, J.M. and
Bachmann, H. 1995 Biological activities of cyanobacteria: evaluation of extracts and
pure compounds. Planta Med. 61, 321-328.
Fay, P. 1965 Heterotrophy and nitrogen fixation in Chlorogloea fritschii. J. Gen. Microbiol.
39, 11-20.
Fay, P. and Van Baalen, C. [Eds] 1987 The Cyanobacteria. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 534
pp.
Gallon, J.R., Jones, D.A. and Page, T.S. 1996 Trichodesmium, the paradoxial
diazotroph. Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl., Algological Studies, 83,215-243.
Geitler, L. 1932 Cyanophyceae. In: L. Rabenhorst [Ed.] Kryptogamen-Flora. 14. Band.
Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft, Leipzig, 1196 pp.
Gorham, P.R. and Carmichael, W.W. 1988 Hazards of freshwater blue-green algae
(Cyanobacteria). In: C.A. Lembi and J.R. Waaland. [Eds] Algae and Human Affairs.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 403-432.
Gons, H.J. 1977 On the light-limited growth of Scenedesmus protuberans Fritsch. Thesis,
University of Amsterdam.
Greuter, W., Barrie, F., Burdet, H.M., Chaloner, W.G., Demoulin, V., Hawksworth, D.L.,
Jørgensen, P.M., Nicholson, D.H., Silva, P.C., Trehane, P. and McNeill, J. [Eds] 1994
International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (Tokyo Code). (Regnum Vegetabile No
131), Koeltz Scientific Books, Königstein.
Gunn, G.J., Rafferty, A.G., Rafferty, G.C., Cockburn, N., Edwards, C., Beattie, K.A. and
Codd, G.A. 1992 Fatal canine neurotoxicosis attributed to blue-green algae
(cyanobacteria). Vet. Rec., 4, 301-302.
Häder, D.P. 1987 Photomovement. In: P. Fay and C. Van Baalen [Eds] The
Cyanobacteria. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 325-345.
Hoek, C. van den, Mann, D.G and Jahns, H.M. [Eds] 1995 Algae. An Introduction to
Phycology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 623 pp.
Hoogenhout, H. and Amesz, J. 1965 Growth rates of photosynthetic microorganisms in
laboratory cultures. Arch. Microbiol., 50, 10-15.
Holland. H.D. 1997 Evidence for life on earth more than 3,850 million years ago. Science,
275, 38-39.
Humm, H.J. and Wicks, S.R. 1980 Introduction and Guide to the Marine Bluegreen
Algae. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 194 pp.
Jaag, O. 1945 Untersuchungen über die Vegetation und Biologie der Algen des nackten
Gesteins in den Alpen, im Jura und im schweizerischen Mittelland. Kryptogamenflora der
Schweiz, Band IX, Heft 3. Kommissionsverlag Buchdruckerei Büchler and Co., Bern.
Jüttner, F. 1987 Volatile organic substances. In: P. Fay and C. Van Baalen [Eds] The
Cyanobacteria. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 453-469.
Källqvist, T. 1981 Hydroecological field experiment 1981. Incubation of Natural
Phytoplankton in Lake Gjersjøen. Norwegian Institute for Water Research, F-80402,
Oslo, 21 pp.
Kann, E. 1988 Zur Autøkologie benthischer Cyanophyten in reinen europäischen Seen
und Fliessgewässern. Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl. 80, Algological Studies, 50-53, 473-495.
Kol, E. 1968 Kryobiologie. I. Kryovegetation. In: H.J. Elster and W. Ohle [Eds] Die
Binnengewässer, Band XXIV. E. Schweizerbart'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Stuttgart,
216 pp.
Laamanen, M. 1996 Cyanoprokaryotes in the Baltic Sea ice and winter plankton. Arch.
Hydrobiol. Suppl. 117, Algological Studies, 83, 423-433.
Larsen, J. and Moestrup, O. 1990 Guide to Toxic and Potentially Toxic Marine Algae.
The Fish Inspection Service, Ministry of Fisheries, Copenhagen. ISBN 87-983238-1-4,
200 pp.
Loogman, J.G. 1982 Influence of photoperiodicity on algal growth kinetics. Thesis,
University of Amsterdam.
Mayr, E. 1981 Biological classification: toward a synthesis of opposing methodologies.
Science, 214, 510-516.
Metz, K., Beattie, K.A., Codd, G.A., Hanselmann, K., Hauser, B., Naegeli, H.P. and
Preisig, H.R. 1997 Identification of a microcystin in benthic cyanobacteria linked to cattle
deaths on alpine pastures in Switzerland. Eur. J. Phycol. 32, 111-117.
Metz, K., Hanselmann, K. and Preisig, H.R. 1998 Environmental conditions in high
mountain lakes containing toxic benthic cyanobacteria. Hydrobiologia,. (In Press).
Minkoff, E.C. 1983 Evolutionary Biology. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading,
627 pp.
Mur, L.R. 1983 Some aspects of the ecophysiology of cyanobacteria. Ann. Microbiol.,
134B, 61-72.
Mur, L.R., Gons, H.J. and Van Liere, L. 1978 Competition of the green alga
Scenedesmus and the blue-green alga Oscillatoria in light limited environments. FEMS
Microbiol. Letters 1, 335-338.
Ormerod, J.G. 1992 Physiology of the photosynthetic prokaryotes. In: N.H. Mann and
N.G. Carr [Eds] Photosynthetic Prokaryotes. Plenum Press, New York, 93-120.
Packer, L. and Glazer, A.N. [Eds] 1988 Cyanobacteria. Methods in Enzymology. Volume
167, Academic Press, New York, 915 pp.
Paerl, H.W. 1988 Growth and reproductive strategies of freshwater blue-green algae. In:
C.D. Sandgren [Ed.] Growth and Reproductive Strategies of Freshwater Phytoplankton.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 261-315.
Paerl, H.W., Tucker, J. and Bland, P.T. 1983 Carotenoid enhancement and its role in
maintaining blue-green (Microcystis aeruginosa) surface blooms. Oceanogr. 28, 847-857.
Rai, A.N. 1990 CRC Handbook of Symbiotic Cyanobacteria. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
253 pp.
Reed, R.H., Chudek, J.A., Foster, R. and Stewart, W.D.P. 1984 Osmotic adjustment in
cyanobacteria. Arch. Microbiol., 138, 333-337.
Reynolds, C.S. 1984 The Ecology of Freshwater Phytoplankton. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Reynolds, C.S. 1987 Cyanobacterial waterblooms. In: P. Callow [Ed.] Advances in
Botanical Research, 13, Academic Press, London, 17-143.
Reynolds, C.S. 1997 Vegetation Processes in the Pelagic. A Model for Ecosystem
Theory. Ecology Institute, D-21385 Oldendorf/Luhe, ISSN 0932-2205.
Richmond, A. 1990 Large scale microalgal culture and applications. Prog. Phycol. Res.,
7, 269-330.
Rippka, R. 1988 Recognition and identification of cyanobacteria. In: L. Packer and A.N.
Glazer [Eds] Cyanobacteria. Methods in Enzymology, Volume 167, Academic Press,
New York, 28-67.
Rippka, R., Deruelles, J., Waterbury, J.B., Herdman, M. and Stanier, R.Y. 1979 Generic
assignments, strain histories and properties of pure cultures of cyanobacteria. J. Gen.
Microb., 111, 1-61.
RIZA 1986 Bestrijding van de Eutrofiëring van het Veluwe-Drontermeer. Rijkswaterstaat
dienst binnenwateren, Lelystad.
Rizvi, S.J.H. and Rizvi, V. 1992 Allelopathy. Basic and Applied Aspects. Chapman & Hall,
London, 480 pp.
Robarts, R.D. and Zohary, T. 1987 Temperature effects on photosynthetic capacity,
respiration, and growth rates of bloom-forming cyanobacteria. N.Z. J. Mar. Freshwat.
Res., 21, 391-399.
Rudi, K., Skulberg, O.M., Larsen, F. and Jakobsen, K.S. 1997 Strain characterization
and classification of oxyphotobacteria in clone cultures on the basis of 16S rRNA
sequences from the variable regions V6, V7 and V8. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 63(7),
2593-2599.
Schopf, J.W. 1996 Cyanobacteria. Pioneers of the early Earth. In: A.K.S.K, Prasad, J.A.
Nienow and V.N.R Rao [Eds] Contributions in Phycology. Nova Hedwigia, Beiheft 112, J.
Cramer, Berlin, 13-32.
Schreurs, H. 1992 Cyanobacterial dominance, relation to eutrophication and lake
morphology. Thesis, University of Amsterdam.
Skulberg, O.M. 1994 Oscillatoialean cyanoprokaryotes and their application for algal
culture technology. Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl. 105, Algological Studies, 75, 265-278.
Skulberg, O.M. 1996a Terrestrial and limnic algae and cyanobacteria In: A. Elvebakk
and P. Prestrud [Eds] A Catalogue of Svalbard Plants, Fungi, Algae and Cyanobacteria.
Part 9, Norsk Polarinstitutt Skrifter 198, 383-395.
Skulberg, O.M. 1996b Toxin produced by cyanophytes in Norwegian inland waters -
health and environment. In: J. Låg [Ed.] Chemical Data as a Basis of Geomedical
Investigations. The Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, Oslo, 197-216.
Skulberg, O.M., Carmichael, W.W., Codd, G.A. and Skulberg, R. 1993 Taxonomy of
toxic Cyanophyceae (Cyanobacteria). In: I. R. Falconer [Ed.] Algal Toxins in Seafood
and Drinking Water. Academic Press Ltd., London, 145-164.
Sneath, P.H.A. 1992 International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria, 1990 Revision.
American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D.C.
Sommer, U. 1989 The role of competition for resources in plankton succession. In: U.
Sommer [Ed.] Plankton Ecology: Succession in Plankton Communities. Springer Verlag,
New York, 57-106.
Staley, J.T., Bryant, M.P., Pfennig, N. and Holt, J.G. [Eds] 1989 Bergey's Manual of
Systematic Bacteriology. Vol. 3, Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore.
Stewart, W.D.P. 1973 Nitrogen fixation by photosynthetic microorganisms. Ann. Rev.
Microbiol., 27,283-316.
Sugawara, H., Ma, J., Miyazaki, S., Shimura, J. and Takishima, Y. [Eds] 1993 World
Directory of Collections of Cultures of Microorganisms., ISBN 4-930813-56-5, 1152 pp.
Utkilen, H.C., Oliver, L.R. and Walsby, A.E. 1985 Buoyancy regulation in a red
Oscillatoria unable to collapse gas vacuoles by turgor pressure. Arch. Hydrobiol., 102,
319-329.
Van Liere, L. and Mur, L.R. 1979 Chapter 9. Some experiments on the competition
between a green alga and a cyanobacterium. In: L. Van Liere, Thesis, University of
Amsterdam.
Van Liere, L., Mur, L.R., Gibson, C.E. and Herdman, M. 1979 Growth and physiology of
Oscillatoria agardhii and some related species, a survey. Dev. Hydrobiol., 2, 67-77.
Van Liere, L. and Mur, L.R. 1980 Occurrence of Oscillatoria agardhii and some related
species, a survey. Dev. Hydrobiol., 2, 67-77.
Van Liere, L. and Walsby, A.E. 1982 Interactions of cyanobacteria with light. In: N.G.
Carr and B.A. Whitton [Eds] The Biology of the Cyanobacteria. Blackwell Science
Publications, Oxford, 9-45.
Vandamme, P., Pot, B., Gillis, M., De Vos, P., Kersters, K. and Swings, J. 1996
Polyphasic taxonomy, a consensus approach to bacterial systematics. Microbiol. Rev.,
60, 407-438.
Van Landingham, S.L. 1982 Guide to the Identification, Environmental Requirements
and Pollution Tolerance of Freshwater Blue-Green Algae (Cyanophyta). United States
Environmental Protection Agency, Cincinnati, Ohio, 341 pp.
Visser P.M. 1990 De primaire productie van het Markermeer. Microbiology Laboratory,
University of Amsterdam.
Walsby, A.E. 1978 The gas vesicles of aquatic prokaryotes. In: R.Y. Stanier, H.J. Rogers
and J.B. Ward [Eds] Relations Between Structure and Functioning in the Prokaryotic Cell.
28th Symposium of the Society for General Microbiology. Cambridge University Press,
338 pp.
Walsby, A.E. 1981 Cyanobacteria: planktonic gas-vaculated forms. In: M. Star, H. Stolp,
A. Balowes and H.G. Schlegel [Eds] The Prokaryotes. Springer Verlag, New York, 224-
235.
Walsby, A.E. 1987 Mechanisms of buoyancy regulation by planktonic cyanobacteria with
gas vesicles. In: P. Fay and C. Van Baalen [Eds] The Cyanobacteria. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, 377-414.
Walsby, A.E., Utkilen, H.C. and Johnsen, I. J. 1983 Buoyancy changes of a red coloured
Oscillatoria agardhii in lake Gjersjøen, Norway. Arch. Microbiol., 97,18-38.
Waterbury, J.B. 1992 The cyanobacteria isolation, purification and identification. In: A.
Balows, H.G., M. Trüper, M. Dworkin, W. Harder and K.H. Schleifer [Eds] The
Prokaryotes. Second edition, Volume II, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2058-2078.
Weber, B., Wessels, D.C.J. and Büdel, B. 1996 Biology and ecology of cryptoendolithic
cyanobacteria of a sandstone outcrop in the Northern Province, South Africa. Arch.
Hydrobiol., Suppl. 117, Algological Studies, 83,565-579.
Whitton, B.A. 1973 Freshwater plankton, In: G.E. Fogg, W.D.P. Stewart, P. Fay and A.E.
Walsby [Eds] The Blue-Green Algae. Academic Press, London, 353-367.
Whitton, B.A. 1992 Diversity, ecology and taxonomy of the cyanobacteria. In: N.H. Mann
and N.G. Carr [Eds] Photosynthetic Prokaryotes. Plenum Press, New York, 1-51.
Wille, N. 1904 Die Schizophyceen der Plankton Expedition. Ergebnisse der Plankton
Expedition der Humboldt-Stiftung. Bd. II. M.f. Verlag von Lipsius & Tischer, Kiel, 88 pp.
Wilmotte, A. 1994 Molecular evolution and taxonomy of the cyanobacteria. In: D.A.
Bryant [Ed.] The Molecular Biology of Cyanobacteria. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht, 1-25.
Woese, C.R. 1987 Bacterial evolution. Microbiol. Rev., 51,221-271.
Zevenboom, W. and Mur, L. 1980 N fixing cyanobacteria, why they do not become
2
dominant in dutch hypertrophic lakes. Dev. Hydrobiol., 2,123-131.
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health consequences,
monitoring and management
Edited by Ingrid Chorus and Jamie Bartram
© 1999 WHO
ISBN 0-419-23930-8
Chapter 3. CYANOBACTERIAL TOXINS
This chapter was prepared by Kaarina Sivonen and Gary Jones
The cyanotoxins are a diverse group of natural toxins, both from the chemical and the
toxicological points of view. In spite of their aquatic origin, most of the cyanotoxins that
have been identified to date appear to be more hazardous to terrestrial mammals than to
aquatic biota. Cyanobacteria produce a variety of unusual metabolites, the natural
function of which is unclear, although some, perhaps only coincidentally, elicit effects
upon other biota. Research has primarily focused on compounds that impact upon
humans and livestock, either as toxins or as pharmaceutically useful substances. Further
ranges of non-toxic products are also being found in cyanobacteria and the biochemical
and pharmacological properties of these are totally unknown. An overview of the
currently identified cyanotoxins is given in section 3.1 and their toxicological properties
are discussed in Chapter 4.
Studies on the occurrence, distribution and frequency of toxic cyanobacteria were
conducted in a number of countries during the 1980s using mouse bioassay. Analytical
methods suitable for quantitative toxin determination only became available in the late
1980s, but studies of specific cyanotoxins have been increasing since then. The results
of both approaches indicate that neurotoxins are generally less common, except
perhaps in some countries where they frequently cause lethal animal poisonings. In
contrast, the cyclic peptide toxins (microcystins and nodularins) which primarily cause
liver injury are more widespread and are very likely to occur if certain taxa of
cyanobacteria are present. Section 3.2 presents an overview of the data currently
available on the occurrence of cyanotoxins. It is noteworthy, however, that current
knowledge is clearly biased by the inconsistent distribution of research effort around the
world, with studies from Asia, Africa and South America beginning to appear in the
1990s. Because the ecological role of the toxins is unclear, it is not possible to use a
functional approach to study the factors that enhance toxicity. Section 3.3 looks at the
available data on relationships between environmental factors and toxin content and at
the emerging understanding of genetic regulation of toxin production. Research into
toxin production by cyanobacteria is increasing, and a better understanding of toxin
function may provide a basis for predicting occurrence of toxicity in the future.
For assessing the health risk caused by cyanotoxins, an understanding of their
persistence and degradation in aquatic environments is of crucial importance. Section
3.4 gives an overview of the current understanding of these processes. Because effects
on aquatic biota may be relevant issues for water managers, and because public
concern could raise questions in this field for practitioners, section 3.5 briefly introduces
the limited state of knowledge of cyanotoxin impacts on other aquatic organisms.
3.1 Classification
Mechanisms of cyanobacterial toxicity currently described and understood are very
diverse and range from hepatotoxic, neurotoxic and dermatotoxic effects to general
inhibition of protein synthesis. To assess the specific hazards of cyanobacterial toxins it
is necessary to understand their chemical and physical properties, their occurrence in
waters used by people, the regulation of their production, and their fate in the
environment.
Cyanotoxins fall into three broad groups of chemical structure: cyclic peptides, alkaloids
and lipopolysaccharides (LPS). An overview of the specific toxic substances within these
broad groups that have been identified to date from different genera of cyanobacteria,
together with their primary target organs in humans, is given in Table 3.1.
3.1.1 Hepatotoxic cyclic peptides - microcystins and nodularins
Globally the most frequently found cyanobacterial toxins in blooms from fresh and
brackish waters are the cyclic peptide toxins of the microcystin and nodularin family.
They pose a major challenge for the production of safe drinking water from surface
waters containing cyanobacteria with these toxins. In mouse bioassays, which
traditionally have been used to screen toxicity of field and laboratory samples,
cyanobacterial hepatotoxins (liver toxins) cause death by liver haemorrhage within a few
hours of the acute doses (see Chapter 4). Microcystins have been characterised from
planktonic Anabaena, Microcystis, Oscillatoria (Planktothrix), Nostoc, and Anabaenopsis
species, and from terrestrial Hapalosiphon genera. Nodularin has been characterised
only from Nodularia spumigena.
The cyclic peptides are comparatively large natural products, molecular weight (MW) ≈
800-1,100, although small compared with many other cell oligopeptides and
polypeptides (proteins) (MW > 10,000). They contain either five (nodularins) or seven
(microcystins) amino acids, with the two terminal amino acids of the linear peptide being
condensed (joined) to form a cyclic compound. They are water soluble and, except
perhaps for a few somewhat more hydrophobic microcystins, are unable to penetrate
directly the lipid membranes of animal, plant and bacterial cells. Therefore, to elicit their
toxic effect, uptake into cells occurs through membrane transporters which otherwise
carry essential biochemicals or nutrients. As will be outlined in section 4.2, this restricts
the target organ range in mammals largely to the liver. In aquatic environments, these
toxins usually remain contained within the cyanobacterial cells and are only released in
substantial amounts on cell lysis. Along with their high chemical stability and their water
solubility, this containment has important implications for their environmental persistence
and exposure to humans in surface water bodies (see section 3.4).
able 3.1 General features of the cyanotoxins
Primary target organ
Toxin group1 Cyanobacterial genera2
in mammals
Cyclic peptides
Microcystins Liver Microcystis, Anabaena, Planktothrix
(Oscillatoria), Nostoc, Hapalosiphon,
Anabaenopsis
Nodularin Liver Nodularia
Alkaloids
Anatoxin-a Nerve synapse Anabaena, Planktothrix (Oscillatoria),
Aphanizomenon
Anatoxin-a(S) Nerve synapse Anabaena
Aplysiatoxins Skin Lyngbya, Schizothrix, Planktothrix (Oscillatoria)
Cylindrospermopsins Liver3 Cylindrospermopsis, Aphanizomenon,
Umezakia
Lyngbyatoxin-a Skin, gastro-intestinal Lyngbya
tract
Saxitoxins Nerve axons Anabaena, Aphanizomenon, Lyngbya,
Cylindrospermopsis
Lipopolysaccharides Potential irritant; affects All
(LPS) any exposed tissue
1 Many structural variants may be known for each toxin group - see section 3.1 for details
2 Not produced by all species of the particular genus
3 Whole cells of toxic species elicit widespread tissue damage, including damage to
kidney and lymphoid tissue
The first chemical structures of cyanobacterial cyclic peptide toxins were identified in the
early 1980s and the number of fully characterised toxin variants has greatly increased
during the 1990s. The first such compounds found in freshwater cyanobacteria were
cyclic heptapeptides (that is they contain seven peptide-linked amino acids) with the
general structure of:
cyclo-(D-alanine1-X2-D-MeAsp3-Z4-Adda5-D-glutamate6-Mdha7)
in which X and Z are variable L amino acids, D-MeAsp3 is D-erythro-β-methylaspartic
acid, and Mdha is N-methyldehydroalanine (Figure 3.1 A). The amino acid Adda,
(2S,3S,8S,9S)-3-amino-9-methoxy-2,6,8-trimethyl-10-phenyldeca-4,6-dienoic acid, is the
most unusual structure in this group of cyanobacterial cyclic peptide toxins.
These compounds were first isolated from the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa
and therefore the toxins were named microcystins (Carmichael et al., 1988). Structural
variations have been reported in all seven amino acids, but most frequently with
substitution of L-amino acids at positions 2 and 4, and demethylation of amino acids at
positions 3 and/or 7 (Figure 3.1A). About 60 structural variants of microcystins have
been characterised so far from bloom samples and isolated strains of cyanobacteria
(Table 3.2).
In one species of brackish water cyanobacterium, an identically acting and structurally
very similar, cyclic pentapeptide occurs. It has been named as nodularin after its
producer, Nodularia spumigena. The chemical structure of nodularin is cyclo-(D-MeAsp1-
L-arginine2-Adda3-D-glutamate4-Mdhb5), in which Mdhb is 2-(methylamino)-2-
dehydrobutyric acid (Figure 3.1B). A few naturally occurring variations of nodularins
have been found: two demethylated variants, one with D-Asp1 instead of D-MeAsp1, the
other with DMAdda3 instead of Adda3; and the non-toxic nodularin which has the 6Z-
stereoisomer of Adda3 (Namikoshi et al., 1994). The equivalent 6Z-Adda3 stereoisomer of
microcystins is also non-toxic. In the marine sponge, Theonella swinhoei, a nodularin
analogue called motuporin has been found. It differs from nodularin only by one amino
acid, having hydrophobic L-Val in place of the polar L-Arg in nodularin (de Silva et al.,
1992). The toxin might be cyanobacterial in origin because the sponge is known to
harbour cyanobacterial symbionts.
The mammalian toxicity of microcystins and nodularins is mediated through their strong
binding to key cellular enzymes called protein phosphatases (see Chapter 4). In solution,
microcystins and nodularins adopt a chemical "shape" that is similar, especially in the
Adda-glutamate part of the cyanotoxin molecule (Rudolph-Böhner et al., 1994; Annila et
al., 1996). Recent studies have shown that this region is crucial for interaction with the
protein phosphatase protein molecule, and hence it is crucial for the toxicity of these
cyanotoxins (Barford and Keller, 1994; Goldberg et al., 1995). Microcystins show an
additional characteristic of forming a covalent bond between the Mdha residue and the
protein phosphatase molecule.
Figure 3.1 The structure of cyclic peptide toxins and cylindrospermopsin.
A. General structure of microcystins (MCYST), cyanobacterial heptapeptide
hepatotoxins, showing the most frequently found variations. X and Z are variable
L-amino acids (in MCYST-LR, X = L-Leusine (L) and Z = L-Arginine (R)); R1 and R2
are H (demethylmicrocystins) or CH ; D-MeAsp is D-erythro-β-methylaspartic acid;
3
Adda is (2S,3S,8S,9S)-3-amino-9-methoxy-2,6,8-trimethyl-10-phenyldeca-4,6-
dienoic acid and Mdha is N-methyldehydroalanine (Dha = dehydroalanine) (see
Table 3.2 for known microcystins); General structure of microcystins cyclo-(D-
Ala1-X2-D-MeAsp3-Z4-Adda5-D-Glu6-Mdha7)
B. Structures of nodularins (Z = L-arginine) and motuporin (Z = L-Valine). Mdhb is
N-methyldehydrobutyrin; Nodularin R ,R = CH ; D-Asp1Nodularin R = H, R = CH ;
1 2 3 1 2 3
DMAdda3 Nodularin R = CH , R = H; Structure of nodularins cyclo-(D-MeAsp1-Z2-
1 3 2
Adda3-D-Glu4-Mdhb5)
C. Structure of cylindrospermopsin; Cylindrospermopsin MW 415; C H N O S
15 21 5 7
Table 3.2 The microcystins (MCYST) reported in the scientific literature
Molecular Toxicity
Microcystin Organism3 Reference(s)
weight LD 2
50
MCYST-LA 909 50 M. aeruginosas, Botes et al., 1984; Kaya
M. viridiss and Watanabe, 1990
MCYST-LAba 923 NR M. aeruginosas Gathercole and Thiel,
1987
MCYST-LL 951 + M. aeruginosab Craig et al., 1993
MCYST-AR 952 250 Microcystis spp.b Namikoshi et al., 1992a
MCYST-YA 959 NR M. aeruginosas Botes et al., 1985
[D-Asp3,Dha7]MCYST-LR 966 + M. aeruginosas, Harada et al., 1991b;
Anabaena sp.s Sivonen et al., 1992a
[D-Asp3,Dha7]MCYST- 969 + Anabaena sp.s Namikoshi et al., 1998
EE(OMe)
MCYST-VF 971 NR M. aeruginosas Bateman et al., 1995
(D-Asp3]MCYST-LR 980 160-300 A. flos-aquaes, Krishnamyrthy et al.,
M. aeruginosas, 1989; Cremer and
M. viridisb, O. Henning, 1991; Harada
agardhiis et al., 1990b; 1991a;
Luukkainen et al., 1993
[Dha7]MCYST-LR 980 250 M. aeruginosas, Harada et al., 1991b;
Anabaena sp.s, Sivonen et al., 1992a;
O. agardhiis Luukkainen et al., 1993
[DMAdda5]MCYST-LR 980 90-100 Microcystis Namikoshi et al., 1992a;
spp.b, Nostoc Sivonen et al., 1992b
sp.s
[Dha7]MCYST-EE(OMe) 983 + Anabaena sp.s Namikoshi et al., 1998
[D-Asp3,Dha7]MCYST- 983 + Anabaena sp.s Namikoshi et al., 1998
E(OMe)E(OMe)
MCYST-LF 985 + M. aeruginosas Azevedo et al., 1994
MCYST-LR 994 50 M. aeruginosas, Botes et al., 1985;
A. flos-aquaes Rinehart et al., 1988;
M. viridiss Krishnamyrthy et al.,
1989; Watanabe et al.,
1988
[D-Asp3,D-Glu(OCH )6]MCYST- 994 NR A. flos-aquaes Sivonen et al., 1992d
3
LR
[(6Z)-Adda5]MCYST-LR 994 >1,200 M. viridisb Harada et al., 1990a,b
[Dha7]MCYST-E(OMe)E(OMe) 997 + Anabaena sp.s Namikoshi et al., 1998
[L-Ser7]MCYST-LR 998 + Anabaena sp.s Namikoshi et al., 1992c
MCYST-LY 1,001 90 M. aeruginosas Stoner et al., 1989
[L-Ser7]MCYST-EE(OMe) 1,001 + Anabaena sp.s Namikoshi et al., 1998
[D-Asp3,Ser7]MCYST- 1,001 + Anabaena sp.s Namikoshi et al., 1998
E(OMe)E(OMe)
MCYST-HilR 1,008 100 Microcystis spp.b Namikoshi et al., 1995
[D-Asp3,ADMAdda5]MCYST-LR 1,008 160 Nostoc sp.s Sivonen et al., 1990a;
Namikoshi et al., 1990
[D-Glu(OCH )6]MCYST-LR 1,008 >1,000 A. flos-aguaes, Sivonen et al., 1992d;
3
Microcystis sp.s Bateman et al., 1995;
Rinehart et al., 1994
[D-Asp3,Dha7]MCYST-RR 1,009 + O. agardhiib, Krishnamyrthy et al.,
Anabaena sp.s, 1989; Sivonen et al.,
M. aeruginosas 1992a; Luukkainen et
al., 1994
[D-Asp3, ADMAdda5, 1,009 + Nostoc sp.s Beattie et al., 1998
Dhb7]MCYST-LR
[L-MeSer7]MCYST-LR 1,012 150 Microcystis spp.b Namikoshi et al., 1992a;
1995
[Dha7]MCYST-FR 1,014 NR Microcystis sp.s Luukkainen et al., 1994
[L-Ser7]MCYST- 1,015 + Anabaena sp.s Namikoshi et al., 1998
E(OMe)E(OMe)
[ADMAdda5]MCYST-LR 1,022 60 Nostoc sp.s Sivonen et al., 1990a;
Namikoshi et al., 1990
[D-Asp3,ADMAdda5]MCYST- 1,022 + Nostoc sp.s Sivonen et al., 1992b
LHar
[D-Asp3]MCYST-RR 1,023 250 O. agardhiis, Meriluoto et al., 1989;
Anabaena sp.s, Sivonen et al., 1992a;
M. aeruginosas Luukkainen et al., 1994
[Dha7]MCYST-RR 1,023 180 M. aeruginosas, Kiviranta et al., 1992;
Anabaena sp.s, Sivonen et al., 1992a;
O. agardhiis Luukkainen et al., 1993
MCYST-LW 1,024 NR M. aeruginosas Bateman et al., 1995
MCYST-FR 1,028 250 Microcystis spp.b Namikoshi et al., 1992a
MCYST-M(O)R 1,028 700-800 Microcystis spp.b Namikoshi et al., 1992a
[Dha7]MCYST-HphR 1,028 + Anabaena sp.s Namikoshi et al., 1992b
[D-Asp3, Dha7]MCYST-HtyR 1,030 + Anabaena sp.s Namikoshi et al., 1992b
[Dha7]MCYST-YR 1,030 + M. aeruginosas Sivonen et al., 1992c
[D-Asp3]MCYST-YR 1,030 + Microcystis spp.b Namikoshi et al., 1992d
MCYST-YM(O) 1,035 56 M. aeruginosab Botes et al., 1985;
Elleman et al., 1978
[ADMAdda5]MCYST-LHar 1,036 60 Nostoc sp.s Sivonen et al., 1990a;
Namikoshi et al., 1990
MCYST-RR 1,037 600 M. aeruginosas, Kusumi et al., 1987;
M. viridiss, Painuly et al., 1988;
Anabaena sp.s Watanabe et al., 1988;
Sivonen et al., 1992a
[(6Z)-Adda5]MCYST-RR 1,037 >1,200 M. viridisb Harada et al., 1990a,b
[D-Ser1, ADMAdda5]MCYST-LR 1,038 + Nostoc sp.s Sivonen et al., 1992b
[ADMAdda5,MeSer7]MCYST- 1,040 + Nostoc sp.s Sivonen et al., 1992b
LR
[L-Ser7]MCYST-RR 1,041 + Anabaena sp.s, Namikoshi et al., 1992c;
M. aeruginosas/b Luukkainen et al., 1994
[D-Asp3,MeSer7]MCYST-RR 1,041 + O. agardhiis Luukkainen et al. 1993
MCYST-YR 1,044 70 M. aeruginosas, Botes et al., 1985;
M. viridiss Watanabe et al., 1988
[D-Asp3]MCYST-HtyR 1,044 160-300 A. flos-aquaes Harada et al., 1991a
[Dha7]MCYST-HtyR 1,044 + Anabaena sp.s Namikoshi et al., 1992b
MCYST-(H )YR 1,048 NR Microcystis spp.b Namikoshi et al., 1995
4
[D-Glu- 1,052 >1,000 Microcystis spp.b Namikoshi et al., 1992a
OC H (CH )OH6]MCYST-LR
2 3 3
[D-Asp3,ADMAdda5, 1,052 + Nostoc sp.s Beattie et al., 1998
Dhb7]MCYST-RR
MCYST-HtyR 1,058 80-100 A. flos-aquaes Harada et al., 1991a
[L-Ser7]MCYST-HtyR 1,062 + Anabaena sp.s Namikoshi et al., 1992b
MCYST-WR 1,067 150-200 Microcystis spp.b Namikoshi et al., 1992a
[D- 1,073 + Nostoc sp.s Beattie et al., 1998
Asp3,ADMAdda5,Dhb7]MCYST-
HtyR
[L-MeLan7]MCYST-LR 1,115 1,000 Microcystis spp.b Namikoshi et al., 1995
Aba Aminoisobutyric acid
ADMAdda O-Acetyl-O-demethylAdda
Dha Dehydroalanine
Dhb Dehydrobutyrine
DMAdda O-DemethylAdda
E(OMe) Glutamic acid methyl ester ∆
(H )Y 1,2,3,4,-tetrahydrotyrosine
4
Har Homoarginine
Hil Homoisoleucine
Hph Homophenylalanine
Hty Homotyrosine
MeLan N-Methyllanthionine
M(O) Methionine-S-oxide
MeSer N-Methylserine
(6Z)-Adda Stereoisomer of Adda at the ∆6 double bond
1 Several partial structures of microcystins have been reported in addition to those
shown in this table (see Boland et al., 1993; Craig et al., 1993; Jones et al., 1995;
Sivonen et al., 1995)
2 Toxicity determined i.p. mouse (µg kg-1); the LD value is the dose of toxin that kills
50
50% of exposed animals; a '+' denotes a toxic result in a non-quantitative mouse
bioassay or inhibition of protein phosphatase and 'NR' denotes 'Not reported'
3 An 's' denotes toxins isolated from culture samples and a 'b' denotes toxins isolated
from bloom samples
Most of the structural variants of microcystin and nodularin are highly toxic within a
comparatively narrow range (intra-peritoneal (i.p.) mouse toxicities largely in the range
50-300 µg kg-1 body weight (bw); see Table 3.2 and section 4.2). Only a few non-toxic
variants have been identified. In general, any structural modifications to the Adda-
glutamate region of the toxin molecule, such as a change in isomerisation of the Adda-
diene (6(E) to 6(Z)) or acylation of the glutamate, renders microcystins and nodularins
non-toxic (Harada et al., 1990 a,b; Rinehart et al., 1994). Linear microcystins and
nodularin are more than 100 times less toxic than the equivalent cyclic compounds. The
linear microcystins are thought to be microcystin precursors and/or bacterial breakdown
products (Choi et al., 1993; Rinehart et al., 1994; Bourne et al., 1996).
Microcystins and nodularin have been characterised from axenic cyanobacterial strains
(i.e. strains free of contaminating bacteria) and thus the cyanobacterial origin of these
compounds is clear. At the present time, it is known that microcystins are produced by
bloom forming species of Microcystis, Anabaena, Oscillatoria (Planktothrix), and Nostoc
(see Table 3.2), by a species of Anabaenopsis and by a soil isolate of Haphalosiphon
hibernicus. Nodularins have been found, with the exception of the marine sponge
Theonella already mentioned, only in Nodularia spumigena (see section 3.2 for more
details). Further species may yet be demonstrated to produce microcystin.
3.1.2 Neurotoxic alkaloids - anatoxins and saxitoxins
Mass occurrences of neurotoxic cyanobacteria have been reported from North America,
Europe and Australia, where they have caused animal poisonings. In mouse bioassays
death by respiratory arrest occurs rapidly (within 2-30 minutes) (see Chapters 4 and 13).
Three families of cyanobacterial neurotoxins are known:
• anatoxin-a and homoanatoxin-a, which mimic the effect of acetyl choline,
• anatoxin-a(S), which is an anticholinesterase, and
• saxitoxins, also known as paralytic shellfish poisons (PSPs) in the marine literature,
which block nerve cell sodium channels.
Anatoxin-a has been found in Anabaena, Oscillatoria and Aphanizomenon,
homoanatoxin-a from Oscillatoria, anatoxin-a(S) from Anabaena, and saxitoxins from
Aphanizomenon, Anabaena, Lyngbya and Cylindrospermopsis. Sixteen confirmed
saxitoxins from cyanobacterial samples have been reported, some of which (e.g. the
decarbamoyl-gonyautoxins) may be chemical breakdown products in some species (see
section 3.4.2).
The alkaloid toxins are diverse, both in their chemical structures and in their mammalian
toxicities. Alkaloids, in general, are a broad group of heterocyclic nitrogenous
compounds (i.e. they contain ring structures with at least one carbon-nitrogen bond)
usually of low to moderate molecular weight (< 1,000). They are produced, in particular,
by plants and by some bacteria, and are invariably bioactive and commonly toxic. The
non-sulphated alkaloid toxins of freshwater cyanobacteria (anatoxins and saxitoxin) are
all neurotoxins. The sulphated PSPs, C-toxins and gonyautoxins (sulphated derivatives
of saxitoxin) are also neurotoxins, but the sulphated alkaloid cylindrospermopsin blocks
protein synthesis with a major impact on liver cells. Some marine cyanobacteria also
contain alkaloids (lyngbyatoxins, aplysiatoxins) which are dermatoxins (skin irritants), but
have also been associated with gastro-enteritis and more general symptoms such as
fever (see Chapter 4).
Alkaloids have varying chemical stabilities, often undergoing spontaneous
transformations to by-products which may have higher or lower potencies than the
parent toxin. Some are also susceptible to direct photolytic degradation (see section 3.4).
Anatoxin-a
Anatoxin-a is a low molecular weight alkaloid (MW = 165), a secondary amine, 2-acetyl-
9-azabicyclo(4-2-1)non-2-ene (Figure 3.2) (Devlin et al., 1977). Anatoxin-a is produced
by Anabaena flos-aquae, Anabaena spp. (flos-aquae-lemmermannii group), Anabaena
planktonica, Oscillatoria, Aphanizomenon and Cylindrospermum (see section 3.2 for
details). Homoanatoxin-a (MW = 179) is an anatoxin-a homologue isolated from an
Oscillatoria formosa (Phormidium formosum) strain (Figure 3.2). It has a propionyl group
at C-2 instead of the acetyl group in anatoxin-a (Skulberg et al., 1992). The LD (lethal
50
dose resulting in 50 per cent deaths) of anatoxin-a and homoanatoxin-a are 200 - 250 µg
kg-1 bw (Devlin et al., 1977; Carmichael et al., 1990; Skulberg et al., 1992).
Anatoxin-a(S)
Anatoxin-a(S) is a unique phosphate ester of a cyclic N-hydroxyguanine (MW = 252)
(Figure 3.2) produced by Anabaena flos-aquae strain NRC 525-17 (Matsunaga et al.,
1989). It has more recently been identified in blooms and isolated strains of Anabaena
lemmermannii (Henriksen et al., 1997; Onodera et al., 1997a). The LD of anatoxin-a(S)
50
is 20 µg kg-1 bw (i.p. mouse) (Carmichael et al., 1990). Structural variants of anatoxin-
a(S) have not been detected.
Saxitoxins
Saxitoxins are a group of carbamate alkaloid neurotoxins which are either non-sulphated
(saxitoxins - STX), singly sulphated (gonyautoxins - GTX) or doubly sulphated (C-toxins)
(Figure 3.2 and Table 3.3). In addition, decarbamoyl variants and several new toxins
have been identified in some species.
Figure 3.2 The chemical structures of cyanobacterial neurotoxins, anatoxin-a,
homoanatoxin-a, anatoxin-a(S), and the general structure of saxitoxins. Sixteen different
saxitoxins have been reported from cyanobacteria (for details see Table 3.3). MW =
molecular weight
Anatoxin-a MW 165; C H NO
10 15
Homoanatoxin-a MW 179; C H NO
11 17
Anatoxin-a(S) MW 252; C H N O P
7 17 4 4
General structure of saxitoxins
Saxitoxins were originally isolated from shellfish where they are concentrated from
marine dinoflagellates (so called "red tide" algae) and have caused deaths in humans
(Anderson, 1994) (see section 4.1). Saxitoxins have been found in the cyanobacteria
Aphanizomenon flos-aquae, Anabaena circinalis, Lyngbya wollei and
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii. The North American Aphanizomenon flos-aquae strains
NH-1 and NH-5 contain mostly neosaxitoxin and less saxitoxin (plus a few unidentified
neurotoxins). Anabaena circinalis strains (from Australia) contain mostly C1 and C2
toxins, with lesser amounts of gonyautoxins 2 and 3. The freshwater cyanobacterium
Lyngbya wollei produced three known and six new saxitoxin analogues.
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii in Brazil was found to contain mostly neosaxitoxin and a
smaller amount of saxitoxin.
Table 3.3 Saxitoxins reported from cyanobacterial strains and bloom samples (for the
chemical structure see Figure 3.2)
Name of toxin Variable chemical groups in toxins Cyanobacteria
R R R R R Aph1 Ana2 Lyn3 Cyl4
1 2 3 4 5
STX H H H CONH OH + + +
2
GTX2 H H OSO - CONH OH +
3 2
GTX3 H OSO - H CONH OH +
3 2
GTX5 H H H CONHSO - OH +
3
C1 H H OSO - CONHSO - OH +
3 3
C2 H OSO - H CONHSO - OH +
3 3
NEO OH H H CONH OH + +
2
GTX1 OH H OSO - CONH OH *
3 2
GTX4 OH OSO - H CONH OH *
3 2
GTX6 OH H H CONHSO - OH *
3
dcSTX H H H H OH + +
dcGTX2 H H OSO - H OH + +
3
dcGTX3 H OSO - H H OH + +
3
LWTX13 H OSO - H COCH H +
3 3
LWTX23 H OSO - H COCH OH +
3 3
LWTX33 H H OSO - COCH OH +
3 3
LWTX43 H H H H H +
LWTX53 H H H COCH OH +
3
LWTX63 H H H COCH H +
3
STX Saxitoxin
GTX Gonyautoxins
C C-toxins
dcSTX Decarbamoylsaxitoxin
LWTX Lyngbya-wollei-toxins
1 Toxins found in Aphanizomenon flos-aquae, New Hampshire, USA (Ikawa et al., 1982;
Mahmood and Carmichael, 1986)
2 Toxins reported in an Anabaena circinalis strain and bloom samples, Australia (Hump-
age et al., 1994; Negri et al., 1995; Negri et al., 1997). dcGTX2 and dcGTX3 are
probably break down products of C1 and C2 in this species (Jones and Negri, 1997). An
asterisk in this column denotes toxins reported by Humpage et al., 1994 for Anabaena
circinalis based on retention time data, but not confirmed by mass spectrometry, and not
found in subsequent studies
3 Toxins detected in Lyngbya wollei, USA (Onodera et al., 1997b)
4 Toxins thus far found in Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii, Brazil (Lagos et al., 1997)
Other neurotoxic cyanobacteria
In marine Trichodesmium blooms from the Virgin Islands, a neurotoxic factor has been
reported which was not anatoxin-a or anatoxin-a(S) but remains to be characterised
(Hawser et al., 1991).
3.1.3 Cytotoxic alkaloids
In tropical and subtropical waters of Australia, the alkaloid hepatotoxin
cylindrospermopsin with a completely different mechanism of toxicity has caused health
problems in drinking water supplies (see section 4.1). It is a cyclic guanidine alkaloid
with a molecular weight of 415 (Figure 3.1C). It is produced by Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii (Hawkins et al., 1985, 1997), Umezakia natans (Harada et al., 1994) and
Aphanizomenon ovalisporum (Banker et al., 1997). In pure form, cylindrospermopsin
mainly affects the liver, although crude extracts of C. raciborskii injected or given orally
to mice also induce pathological symptoms in the kidneys, spleen, thymus and heart
(see Chapter 4 for more details). Pure cylindrospermopsin has an LD in mice (i.p.) of
50
2.1 mg kg l-1 bw at 24 h and 0.2 mg kg l-1 bw at 5-6 days (Ohtani et al., 1992). Recently,
new structural variants of cylindrospermopsin have been isolated from an Australian
strain of C. raciborskii, with one being identified as demethoxy-cylindrospermopsin
(Chiswell et al., 1999).
Figure 3.3 The chemical structures of debromoaplysiatoxin and lyngbiatoxin-a
Debromoaplysiatoxin
Lyngbyatoxin A
3.1.4 Dermatotoxic alkaloids - aplysiatoxins and lyngbyatoxin
Benthic marine cyanobacteria such as Lyngbya, Oscillatoria and Schizothrix may
produce toxins causing severe dermatitis among swimmers in contact with the filaments
(see section 4.2). The inflammatory activity of Lyngbya is caused by aplysiatoxins and
debromoaplysiatoxin (Figure 3.3) which are potent tumour promoters and protein kinase
C activators (Mynderse et al., 1977; Fujiki et al., 1990). Another strain of Lyngbya
majuscula has caused dermatitis and severe oral and gastrointestinal inflammation. It
was found to contain lyngbyatoxin-a (see Figure 3.3) (Cardellina et al., 1979).
Debromoaplysiatoxin along with other toxic compounds has also been isolated from
other Oscillatoriaceae, such as Schizothrix calcicola and Oscillatoria nigroviridis.
3.1.5 Irritant toxins - lipopolysaccharides
Weise et al. (1970) were the first to isolate LPS from the cyanobacterium Anacystis
nidulans and numerous reports of endotoxins in cyanobacteria have followed.
Lipopolysaccarides are generally found in the outer membrane of the cell wall of Gram
negative bacteria, including cyanobacteria, where they form complexes with proteins and
phospholipids. They are pyrogenic and toxic (Weckesser and Drews, 1979).
Lipopolysaccarides, as the name implies, are condensed products of a sugar, usually a
hexose, and a lipid, normally a hydroxy C -C fatty acid. The many structural variants
14 18
of LPS are generally phylogenetically conserved, i.e. particular orders, genera and
occasionally species, have identical or similar fatty acid and sugar components
contained in their cell wall LPS. It is generally the fatty acid component of the LPS
molecule that elicits an irritant of allergenic response in humans and mammals.
Lipopolysaccharides are an integral component of the cell wall of all Gram negative
bacteria, including cyanobacteria, and can elicit irritant and allergenic responses in
human and animal tissues that come in contact with the compounds. There is
considerable diversity of LPS composition among the cyanobacteria, but differences are
largely related to phylogeny. Thus, different genera typically have distinct LPS
compositions that are largely conserved within that genus (Kerr et al., 1995).
Cyanobacterial LPS are considerably less potent than LPS from pathogenic gram-
negative bacteria such as, for example, Salmonella (see Chapter 4). The chemical
stability of cyanobacterial LPS in surface waters is unknown.
Structurally, LPS is a complex polymer composed of four regions. Region I, the O-
antigen region, consists of repeating oligosaccharide units that may vary in structure,
with numerous combinations of different sugar residues and associated glycosidic
linkages. As suggested by its name, the O-antigen also exhibits several antigenic
determinants that constitute the receptor sites for a number of lysogenic bacteriophages.
Regions II and III are the outer core and backbone of a core polysaccharide. There is
generally only minor variation in core structure between species. The backbone of the
polysaccharide is connected to a glycolipid, lipid A (Region IV), via a short link normally
composed of 3-deoxy-D-mannoocmiosonic acid (KDO). Lipid A is a disaccharide of
glucosamines highly substituted with phosphate, fatty acids and KDO, although the
proportion of KDO is low or absent in cyanobacteria compared with other bacterial LPS.
The lipid A component is also acetylated with amide and ester-linked hydroxy fatty acids.
Recent studies of the fatty acid composition of Australian species of cyanobacteria (Kerr
et al., 1995) show a range of β-OH fatty acids ranging in size from C to C . Normal,
10 22
saturated and branched chain acids have been detected. There was a stark
predominance of straight chain 14:0 and 18:0 β-OH acids in Microcystis strains that was
quite distinct from Anabaena and Nodularia strains where 16:0 β-OH predominated the
LPS fatty acid fraction.
Although comparatively poorly studied, cell wall components, particularly LPS
endotoxins from cyanobacteria may contribute to human health problems associated
with exposure to mass occurrences of cyanobacteria. The few results available indicate
that cyanobacterial LPS is less toxic than the LPS of other bacteria, such as Salmonella
(Keleti and Sykora, 1982; Raziuddin et al., 1983) (see also section 4.2). More studies
are needed to evaluate the chemical structures and health risks of cyanobacterial LPS.
3.1.6 Other bioactive compounds
Cyanobacteria are known to produce several other bioactive compounds, some of which
are of medical interest, as well as compounds toxic to other cyanobacteria, bacteria,
algae and zooplankton (see section 3.5). Severe intoxication of fish embryos by crude
extracts of Planktothrix agardhii has been reported by Oberemm et al. (1997). Skulberg
et al. (1994) reported the presence of an unidentified "protracted toxic effect" in
cyanobacterial samples that caused death within 4-24 hours in mice. Whether this effect
was due to a specific cyanotoxin is unclear.
Cyanobacteria have been found to be a rich source of biomedically interesting
compounds and therefore screening programmes for new bioactivities are underway.
Cyanobacteria are known to produce antitumour, antiviral, antibiotic and antifungal
compounds. Of the cyanobacterial extracts screened by a Hawaiian research group, 0.8
per cent showed solid tumour selective cytotoxicity (Moore et al., 1996). Depsipeptides
(peptides with an ester linkage) called cryptophycins isolated from a cyanobacterium,
Nostoc sp. strain GSV 224, are promising candidates for an anticancer drug (Trimurtulu
et al., 1995). Recently, several new cyclic or linear peptides and depsipeptides from
cyanobacteria have been characterised. Some are protease inhibitors, but the biological
activity of the others remains to be characterised (Namikoshi and Rinehart, 1996). Many
of the cyanobacterial bioactive compounds possess structural similarities to natural
products from marine invertebrates.
3.2 Occurrence of cyanotoxins
3.2.1 Mass occurrences of toxic cyanobacteria
The toxicity of cyanobacterial mass occurrences (blooms) was originally brought to the
attention of scientists through reports of animal poisonings by farmers and veterinarians,
with the first well documented case being reported from Australia in 1878 (Francis, 1878).
In most, if not all, reported cases since that time, afflicted animals consumed water from
water bodies where there was an obvious presence of a cyanobacterial scum on the
water surface (see Ressom et al. (1994) and Yoo et al. (1995) for a list of reported
animal poisonings). More recent measurements of cyanobacterial toxins using sensitive
modem analytical methods have often revealed high frequencies of toxic blooms even
when animal poisonings have not been reported (Table 3.4).
Throughout the world, it appears that liver-toxic (hepatotoxic, microcystin-containing)
freshwater blooms of cyanobacteria are more commonly found than neurotoxic blooms.
Liver-toxic blooms have been reported from all continents and almost every part of the
world where samples have been collected for analysis. Nevertheless, mass occurrences
of neurotoxic cyanobacteria are common in some countries and these have been
reported from North America, Europe and Australia, where they have caused several
animal poisonings. Blooms which have caused both liver and kidney damage due to the
toxin cylindrospermopsin (and possibly related cyanotoxins) have been reported in
Australia, Japan, Israel and Hungary.
In recent years, surveys have been carried out in a number of countries in South
America, Africa, Australasia, Asia and Europe. The conclusion that can be drawn from
these surveys is that toxic cyanobacteria are internationally ubiquitous, and that as
further surveys are carried out more toxic cyanobacterial blooms and new toxic species
will be discovered. This is particularly true of tropical and subtropical regions that are
currently under-represented in the literature. It seems likely that every country in the
world will have water bodies which support blooms of toxic cyanobacteria at some time
or another. It is also important to note that mass occurrences of toxic cyanobacteria are
not always associated with human activities causing pollution or "cultural eutrophication"
(see Chapter 2). For example, massive blooms of toxic cyanobacteria have been
reported in Australian reservoirs with pristine or near-pristine catchments (watersheds),
and toxic benthic cyanobacteria have killed cattle drinking from oligotrophic, high-alpine
waters in Switzerland.
3.2.2 Species composition and variation among toxic blooms
Cyanobacterial populations may be dominated by a single species or be composed of a
variety of species, some of which may not be toxic. Even within a single-species bloom
there may be a mixture of toxic and non-toxic strains. A strain is a specific genetic
subgroup within a particular species, and each species may encompass tens or
hundreds of strains, each with slightly different traits. Some strains are much more toxic
than others, sometimes by more than three orders of magnitude. This can mean that one
highly toxic strain, even when occurring in minor amounts amongst larger numbers of
non-toxic strains, may render a bloom sample toxic (Sivonen et al., 1989a,b; Bolch et al.,
1997; Vezie et al., 1998).
Table 3.4 Frequencies of mass occurrences of toxic cyanobacteria in freshwaters
No of samples % of toxic Type of
Country Reference
tested samples toxicity
Australia 231 42 Hepatotoxic Baker and Humpage,
1994
Neurotoxic
Australia 31 841 Neurotoxic Negri et al., 1997
Brazil 16 75 Hepatotoxic Costa and Azevedo,
1994
Canada, Alberta 24 66 Hepatotoxic Gorham, 1962
Neurotoxic
Canada, Alberta 39 95 Hepatotoxic Kotak et al., 1993
Canada, Alberta (3 226 741 Hepatotoxic Kotak et al., 1995
lakes)
Canada, 50 10 Hepatotoxic Hammer, 1968
Saskatchewan
Neurotoxic
China 26 73 Hepatotoxic Carmichael et al.,
1988b
Czech and Slovak 63 82 Hepatotoxic Maršálek et al., 1996
Rep.
Denmark 296 82 Hepatotoxic Henriksen et al.,
1996b
SDF
Neurotoxic
Former German 10 70 Hepatotoxic Henning and Kohl,
1981
Dem. Rep. SDF
Germany 533 721 Hepatotoxic Fastner, 1998
Germany 393 22 Neurotoxic Bumke-Vogt, 1998
Greece 18 ? Hepatotoxic Lanaras et al., 1989
Finland 215 44 Hepatotoxic Sivonen, 1990a
Neurotoxic
France, Brittany 22 731 Hepatotoxic Vezie et al., 1997
Hungary 50 66 Hepatotoxic Törökné, 1991
Japan 23 39 Hepatotoxic Watanabe and Oishi,
1980
Netherlands 10 90 Hepatotoxic Leeuwangh et al.,
1983
Norway 64 92 Hepatotoxic Skulberg et al., 1994
Neurotoxic
SDF
Portugal 30 60 Hepatotoxic Vasconcelos, 1994
Scandinavia 81 60 Hepatotoxic Berg et al., 1986
Sweden 331 47 Hepatotoxic Willén and Mattsson,
1997
Neurotoxic
UK 50 48 Hepatotoxic Codd and Bell, 1996
281
USA, Minnesota 92 53 Unspecified Olson, 1960
Neurotoxic
USA, Wisconsin 102 25 Hepatotoxic Repavich et al., 1990
Neurotoxic
Mean 59
1 HPLC was used to detect the toxin content of the samples
Some of the studies shown in the table have been conducted over several years while
others lasted only one season. The relative share of cyanobacteria in the samples varied;
low frequency of cyanobacteria led to low percentages of toxic samples in some studies.
In most of the studies the method used to detect toxicity is mouse bioassay, normally
with a 4-hour time limit (or longer when slow death factors (SDF) have been included).
SDF may indicate low hepatotoxicity of samples or other unknown toxicity.
Toxic and non-toxic strains from the same cyanobacterial species cannot be separated
by microscopic identification. The use of molecular genetic methods, in particular the use
of molecular probes and primers that target specific toxin production genes, will lead to
the development of more precise identification methods for toxic cyanobacteria in the
future. To confirm that a particular cyanobacterial strain is a toxin-producer, it is
important to isolate a pure culture of that strain, preferably free of other bacteria; then to
detect and quantify toxin concentrations in the pure culture (either by bioassay or
chemical analysis); and, where possible, to purify and characterise fully the toxins (for
such examples see Tables 3.2 and 3.3). It is likely that the list of confirmed toxic species
will increase in the future due to the isolation of new species and strains, and because of
the use of improved isolation, culturing and analytical methods.
Microcystis sp., commonly Microcystis aeruginosa, are linked most frequently to
hepatotoxic blooms world-wide (see Tables 3.2 and 3.5 for details and references for all
toxic species). Microcystis viridis and Microcystis botrys strains also have been shown to
produce microcystins. As noted in section 2.2, Microcystis is a non-nitrogen-fixing genus
which is often dominant under nutrient-rich conditions (especially where there is a
significant supply of ammonia), although it also forms blooms in less polluted waters.
Microcystin-producing Anabaena sp. have been reported from Canada, Denmark,
Finland, France and Norway. A recent study from Egypt revealed that 25 per cent of 75
Anabaena and Nostoc strains isolated from soil, rice fields and water bodies contained
microcystins. Planktothrix agardhii and Planktothrix rubescens (previously called
Oscillatoria agardhii and O. rubescens) are common microcystin producers in the
Northern Hemisphere; toxic strains of these have been isolated from blooms in Denmark,
Finland and Norway. In addition, these species were frequently shown to be dominant in
microcystin containing blooms in China, in Germany and in Sweden. In Swiss alpine
lakes, Oscillatoria limosa, which is benthic (i.e. it grows attached to sediments and
rocks), is a microcystin producer. In spite of the widespread occurrence of
cyanobacterial blooms in Australia, Planktothrix blooms are rare there. This may be due
to the higher temperature and tendency for elevated clay-derived turbidity in Australian
water bodies.
Table 3.5 Toxic cyanobacteria species and their geographical distribution
Toxic species Cyanotoxin Location Reference(s)
Anabaena flos-aquae Microcystins Canada Krishnamurthy et al., 1989;
Harada et al., 1991
Anabaena ? Microcystins Denmark Henriksen et al., 1996b
Anabaena spp. Microcystins Egypt Yanni and Carmichael, 1997
Anabaena spp. (flos-aquae, Microcystins Finland Sivonen et al., 1990b; 1992a
lemmermannii, circinalis)
Anabaena circinalis Microcystins France Vezie et al., 1998
Anabaena flos-aquae Microcystins Norway Sivonen et al., 1992a
Microcystis aeruginosa Microcystins Worldwide Several; see Rinehart et al.,
1994 for a summary
M. viridis Microcystins Japan Kusumi et al., 1987; Watanabe
et al., 1986
M. botrys Microcystins Denmark Henriksen et al., 1996b
Planktothrix agardhii Microcystins China Ueno et al., 1996a
P. agardhii Microcystins Denmark Henriksen et al., 1996b
P. mougeotii Microcystins Denmark Henriksen et al., 1996b
P. agardhii Microcystins Finland Sivonen, 1990b; Luukkainen et
al., 1993
P. agardhii Microcystins Norway Krishnamurthy et al., 1989;
Meriluoto et al., 1989
Oscillatoria limosa Microcystins Switzerland Mez et al., 1996
Nostoc sp. Microcystins Finland Sivonen et al., 1990a, 1992b
Nostoc sp. Microcystins England Beattie et al., 1998
Anabaenopsis millerii Microcystins Greece Lanaras and Cook, 1994
Haphalosiphon hibernicus Microcystins USA Prinsep et al., 1992
(soil isolate)
Nodularia spumigena Nodularins Australia Baker and Humpage, 1994;
Jones et al., 1994
N. spumigena Nodularins Baltic Sea Sivonen et al., 1989b
N. spumigena Nodularins New Carmichael et al., 1988a;
Zealand Rinehart et al., 1988
Aphanizomenon Cylindrospermopsin Israel Banker et al., 1997
ovalisporum
Cylindrospermopsis Cylindrospermopsin Australia Hawkins et al., 1985; 1997
raciborskii
C. raciborskii Cylindrospermopsin Hungary Törökné, 1997
Umezakia natans Cylindrospermopsin Japan Harada et al., 1994
Anabaena flos-aquae Anatoxin-a Canada Carmichael et al., 1975; Devlin
et al., 1977
Anabaena spp. Anatoxin-a Finland Sivonen et al., 1989a
Anabaena blooms Anatoxin-a Germany Bumke-Vogt, 1998
Anabaena sp. Anatoxin-a Ireland James et al., 1997
Anabaena sp. Anatoxin-a (minor Japan Park et al., 1993a
amounts)
Anabaena planctonica Anatoxin-a Italy Bruno et al., 1994
bloom
Aphanizomenon sp. Anatoxin-a Finland Sivonen et al., 1989a
Aphanizomenon blooms Anatoxin-a Germany Bumke-Vogt, 1998
Cylindrospermum sp. Anatoxin-a Finland Sivonen et al., 1989a
Microcystis sp. Anatoxin-a (minor Japan Park et al., 1993a
amounts)
Oscillatoria sp. benthic Anatoxin-a Scotland Edwards et al., 1992
Oscillatoria sp. ? Anatoxin-a Ireland James et al., 1997
Planktothrix sp. Anatoxin-a Finland Sivonen et al., 1989a
Planktothrix formosa Homoanatoxin-a Norway Skulberg et al., 1992
Anabaena flos-aquae Anatoxin-a(S) Canada Matsunaga et al., 1989;
Mahmood and Carmichael,
1987
A. lemmermannii Anatoxin-a(S) Denmark Henriksen et al., 1997;
Onodera et al., 1997a
Anabaena circinalis Saxitoxins Australia Humpage et al., 1994; Negri et
al., 1995; 1997
Aphanizomenon flos-aquae Saxitoxins USA Jackim and Gentile, 1968;
Ikawa et al., 1982; Mahmood
and Carmichael, 1986
Cylindrospermopsis Saxitoxins Brazil Lagos et al., 1997
raciborskii
Lyngbya wollei Saxitoxins USA Carmichael et al., 1997;
Onodera et al., 1997b
The toxicity of the species listed in the table is in most cases verified by laboratory
studies with isolated strains. A few bloom samples are also included from the new areas
of occurrence where toxicity of the species is not verified by strain isolation but the toxins
are determined in the bloom samples. The authors have suggested the listed species as
the probable toxin producer (based on their dominance) but these reports should be
treated as tentative until pure strains are studied.
Nostoc rivulare blooms in Texas, USA have caused poisoning of domestic and wild
animals (Davidson, 1959) and, more recently, two unidentified Nostoc strains were
shown to produce microcystins (Table 3.5).
The hepatotoxin, cylindrospermopsin, has been found in Cylindro-spermopsis raciborskii
in Australia and Hungary, in Umezakia natans in Japan, and in Aphanizomenon
ovalisporum in Israel (Table 3.5). In spite of their occurrence in Europe, it appears that
cylindrospermopsin-producing genera most commonly form toxic blooms in subtropical,
tropical or arid zone water bodies. However, there have been reports of increasing
occurrences of Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii in Europe and the USA (Padisák, 1997).
The neurotoxin, anatoxin-a, was first shown to be produced by Anabaena flos-aquae
strains originating from Canada, and later by Finnish strains of unidentified Anabaena
species, and in individual species of Oscillatoria, Aphanizomenon, and Cylindrospermum,
by benthic Oscillatoria from Scotland, and by Anabaena and Oscillatoria in Ireland. It
also was present in Anabaena planctonica blooms in Sardinia, Italy, in Anabaena and
Aphanizomenon blooms in Germany, and in minor amounts in some Japanese bloom
samples, as well as in Anabaena strains. Homoanatoxin-a has been characterised from
an Oscillatoria formosum (Phormidium formosum) strain from Norway (see Table 3.5).
To date, anatoxin-a(S) has been found only from Anabaena species: A. flos-aquae in the
USA and Scotland, and A. lemmermannii in Denmark.
Aphanizomenon flos-aquae blooms and strains were found to contain saxitoxins in the
USA and this species was for a long time the only known saxitoxin producer amongst
the cyanobacteria. More recently, saxitoxins have been shown to be common in
Australian rivers and reservoirs and to be produced by Anabaena circinalis. In North
America, a benthic freshwater Lyngbya wollei was found to produce saxitoxins, as was a
strain of Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii in Brazil (Table 3.5).
3.2.3 Cyanotoxin patterns in strains and species of cyanobacteria
Cyanobacteria may produce several toxins simultaneously. In general, more than one
microcystin has been characterised from the strains listed in Table 3.2. Among
neurotoxic strains, several PSPs are found in the same strain, although there are
considerable variations between species (Table 3.3). Furthermore, simultaneous
neurotoxin and hepatotoxin production has been noted; the best example studied being
the Anabaena flos-aquae strain NRC 525-17 which produces anatoxin-a(S) (Matsunaga
et al., 1989) and several microcystins (Harada et al., 1991a).
Microcystin
Although many strains produce several microcystins simultaneously, usually only one or
two of them are dominant in any single strain. Qualitative variation in the microcystins
present is most frequently found among strains of Anabaena but also in Microcystis
(Sivonen et al., 1995). Some taxa have a number of microcystins in common, such as
planktonic Anabaena, Microcystis and Planktothrix (Oscillatoria). However, there is
evidence of microcystin variants that are typical for certain cyanobacterial taxa.
Planktothrix and some strains of Anabaena produce only demethylmicrocystins (Table
3.2). Planktothrix (Oscillatoria) isolates from Finland (13 strains studied and toxins fully
characterised) seem to produce one of two types of microcystin (D-Asp3-RR or Dha7-RR)
(Sivonen et al., 1995).
German field samples dominated by Planktothrix have also shown these microcystins,
with dominance of one major demethylated microcystin in populations of P. rubescens,
and two or three of these variants in populations of P. agardhii (Fastner et al., 1998).
Microcystis strains from Japan appear to contain chiefly microcystin-LR, -RR and -YR,
with some cultures showing all three variants, and some strains being dominated by one
of them. These three microcystins are the only variants reported in several studies on M.
aeruginosa and M. viridis (e.g. Watanabe, 1996). Many of the microcystins listed in
Table 3.2 have been found only in minor amounts or, to date, have been found to be
produced only by individual isolates.
In natural samples which usually contain many strains, or more than one toxin-producing
species, different combinations of microcystins can be found. For example, in a
Microcystis bloom from Homer Lake, USA, 19 different microcystins were characterised
(Namikoshi et al., 1992a, 1995) and in one Australian bloom of Microcystis aeruginosa,
23 microcystins were detected by high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), none of
which were microcystin-LR (Jones et al., 1995).
Microcystin-LR is often mentioned as the most frequently occurring microcystin, although
such observations may be biased by the fact that a chemical standard for the analysis of
microcystin-LR was the earliest to be commercially available (see Chapter 13). It has
been reported to be the major toxin in bloom and strain samples from Portugal
(Vasconcelos et al., 1995. 1996), France (Vezie et al., 1997), Canada (Kotak et al., 1993)
and frequently co-occurring with microcystin-RR and -YR in Japan (Watanabe et al.,
1988, 1989).
Geographical patterns are indicated by some survey results. Wide variation among the
L-amino acids of microcystins has been reported for South Africa (Scott, 1991), frequent
presence of demethylmicrocystins (RR and LR) has been seen in Finnish strains
(Sivonen et al., 1995) and microcystins in Danish samples show wide variation
(Henriksen, 1996a). In part, these patterns probably reflect regional differences in
dominance of cyanobacterial species or strains. Water bodies with regular dominance of
specific taxa are likely to exhibit characteristic patterns of microcystin variants.
Nodularin
The cyanotoxin, nodularin, is found in waters where Nodularia spumigena is present; the
most prominent areas being the Baltic Sea and brackish water estuaries and coastal
lakes of Australia and New Zealand. However, the best known Nodularia spumigena
bloom location, Lake Alexandrina, Australia, has salinities which are only slightly
elevated above normal river water and at levels still suitable for drinking water. The
presence of variants of nodularin in environmental samples is usually rather insignificant.
In the Baltic Sea, the collection of samples for several years has shown nodularin to be
the major compound present. The same is true for the almost 90 hepatotoxic Nodularia
strains isolated from the same source (Sivonen et al., 1989b; Lehtimäki et al., 1997).
Analyses of several strains isolated from blooms across Australia have revealed similar
results, with nodularin variants being found rarely, and then only at low relative
abundance (Jones et al., 1994; Blackburn et al., 1997).
Saxitoxins
There is much diversity of saxitoxin distribution in cyanobacteria from around the world
(Table 3.3). In addition, the lack of analytical standards for many saxitoxins has probably
restricted findings in some countries. Saxitoxin-producing Anabaena circinalis blooms
are widespread in Australian rivers and reservoirs, and the relative abundance of
individual toxins is remarkably constant in toxin-producing strains, which is quite
opposite to the microcystin-producing cyanobacteria. In all healthy Anabaena circinalis
cultures examined in Australia, the relative composition of individual saxitoxins is very
similar and dominated by C-toxins (Blackburn et al., 1997). As blooms and cultures age,
the proportion of decarbamoyl-gonyautoxins breakdown products increases at the
expense of the C-toxins (see section 3.4). In North American Aphanizomenon flos-aquae
and in Brazilian Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii samples, mostly neosaxitoxin and
smaller amounts of saxitoxin have been detected. In the case of the Aphanizomenon
flos-aquae from North America, only bloom samples and strains from New Hampshire,
USA have been found to contain saxitoxins. Mat-forming Lyngbya wollei from Alabama,
USA was found to produce decarbamoyl saxitoxin (dcSTX), decarbamoylgonyautoxin-2
and-3 (dcGTX2 and dcGTX3) and six new saxitoxins (see section 3.1).
3.2.4 Concentrations of cyanotoxins in surface waters
Information on the concentrations of cyanotoxins in surface waters has been appearing
only recently in the international literature. In early studies (pre-1990s), the toxicity of
bloom samples was determined by mouse bioassays, but this method is unsuitable for
measuring the low concentrations of cyanotoxins that usually prevail in cyanobacterial
populations when they do not accumulate in scums. The development of better
analytical methods, in the first instance HPLC and more recently enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), (and for microcystins and nodularins also the protein
phosphatase assay) has made the quantification of total and individual toxins possible
(see Box 3.1 and Chapter 13).
The quantitative determination of toxin concentrations is mostly performed from
lyophilised (freeze-dried) cultures, bloom samples or seston (particulate material
suspended in water, which contains not only cyanobacterial cells but usually other algae,
some zooplankton, and possibly inorganic material such as soil and sediment particles)
(see Chapter 13). Results are usually expressed as milligrams or micrograms of toxin
per gram dry weight (dw). Whereas in cultures and bloom samples, the dry weight
originates from cyanobacteria, it will encompass further particles (seston) in plankton
samples taken outside of scum areas. The highest published concentrations of
cyanotoxins from cyanobacterial bloom samples, measured by HPLC, are (see Table
3.6):
• microcystin - 7,300 µg g-1 dw from China and Portugal,
• nodularin - 18,000 µg g-1 dw from the Baltic Sea,
• cylindrospermopsin - 5,500 µg g-1 dw from Australia,
• anatoxin-a - 4,400 µg g-1 dw from Finland,
• saxitoxins - 3,400 µg g-1 dw from Australia,
• anatoxin-a(S) - 3,300 µg g-1 dw from the USA.
Box 3.1 Toxins and toxicity: what's in a name?
There is often a misunderstanding of the terms "toxicity" or "toxin content" when applied to
cyanobacteria or a water sample that contains cyanotoxins. In particular, the terms are often
taken to be synonymous, which they are not. Furthermore, the measurement units in which data
are reported are not always carefully considered.
To some extent, the problem lies in the different ways in which toxin data can be expressed, and
the way in which people think about the cyanobacterial or water sample, particularly in the context
of their own professional background. For example, a water treatment plant operator may assume
or expect a "toxicity" value to refer to the toxin concentration per litre of drinking water, a biologist
may think of the same term to mean the amount of toxin per mass of cyanobacteria, whereas a
toxicologist will normally take the term to reflect the amount of cyanobacteria needed to kill an
animal.
Toxicity. In the strict sense, toxicity refers only to animal testing data, and is expressed as the
amount of cyanobacteria lethal to an animal (usually normalised per kilogram of body weight).
The commonly reported LD value, a measure of toxin potency, is the amount of cyanobacteria
50
or pure toxin needed to kill 50 per cent of animals in an experimental trial, again normalised per
kilogram of body weight. Thus, the lower the LD the more potent the cyanobacterial sample or
50
pure toxin (see Table 3.2 for examples). Note, however, that cell growth assays may express
results as EC (concentration reducing growth rate by 50 per cent).
50
Toxin concentration and toxin content. Toxin concentration can refer either to the amount of toxin
per litre of water or the amount of toxin per mass of cyanobacterial bloom material. Therefore,
particular attention must be paid to the units in which the data are reported. In the published
literature on toxic cyanobacteria, the amount of toxin per mass of bloom material is often referred
to as the toxin content. Strictly speaking, this is incorrect; the correct term should be the
gravimetric, or per cyanobacterial mass, toxin concentration.
Toxin quota. This refers to the amount (mass or moles) of toxin per cyanobacteria cell.
Cell bound versus free toxin. In most circumstances almost all toxins are cell-bound (within the
cells) and little or no toxin is found in solution except where a bloom is senescent or where an
algicide has been applied.
Higher concentrations have been reported in unpublished studies and may be expected
under some circumstances.
For the purposes of water treatment and public health management, toxin concentration
per litre of water is often a more relevant unit, for example for relating ambient
concentrations to guideline levels. Concentration per litre usually refers to toxins
contained within the cells as well as dissolved in water, and taken from a defined volume
of water. Very high concentrations of microcystins per litre of water (rather than per
mass of cyanobacteria), have been reported up to 25,000 µg l-1 microcystin and up to
3,300 µg l-1 anatoxin-a(S) (Table 3.6). It should be noted, however, that these very high
concentrations of toxins would be from scums or from very dense accumulations of
cyanobacteria.
In one or two studies where many toxin concentration measurements have been made
from more or less randomly collected plankton samples, the distribution of data revealed
a small number of samples with high toxin concentrations, some samples with moderate
concentrations, and many samples with low or zero concentrations (Figure 3.4).
However, such surveys tend to include a large proportion of samples where the particle
content is not dominated by cyanobacteria. If cyanobacteria constitute only a small
fraction of the total dry weight, toxin concentration per gram dry weight will necessarily
be low. In contrast, if mass developments of toxic cyanobacterial species are
investigated, cyanobacteria will constitute a large fraction of the total dry weight. In these
cases, toxin content is often high. Recent German data show that the relative frequency
of high, moderate and low toxin concentrations per gram dry weight is dependent on the
particular species that is dominant (Figure 3.5).
For management, the option of estimating toxin content from the biomass of a dominant
cyanobacterial species (i.e. the "toxin quota" per cell or biovolume) can be helpful.
Survey data from Germany show that microcystin toxin quotas differ between taxa, but
variation within most of the samples dominated by the same taxon is only moderate
(two- to fivefold) (Figure 3.5). In contrast, an Australian investigation with other species
of cyanobacteria showed substantial variation of toxin concentrations per dry weight,
even in cases with dominance of the same cyanobacterial species (Negri et al., 1997).
Table 3.6 Toxin concentrations reported in cyanobacterial bloom or water samples
No. of
Range of total
toxic
Period concentrations
samples Toxins Analysis
Location of (µg g-1 dw, Reference
(total no. identified method
study unless otherwise
of
indicated)
samples)
Microcystins
Australia 1991 4 Microcystins, 2,100-4,1002 HPLC Jones et al.,
24 unidentified 1995
Canada, 1990 37(50) Microcystin-LR 4-610 HPLC Kotak et al.,
Alberta 1993
Canada, 1990- 168(226) Microcystin-LR 1-1,550 HPLC Kotak et al.,
Alberta (3 93 1995
lakes)
China 1988 5(10) Microcystin- 200-7,300 HPLC Zhang et al.,
RR, -LR 1991
Czech and 1995- (63) Microcystin-LR 4-6,835 HPLC Maršálek et
Slovak 96 al., 1996
Rep.
Denmark 1992- Microcystin- 3-2,800 HPLC Christoffersen,
94 RR, -LR 1996
Denmark 1993- 198(296) Microcystins 5-1,900 HPLC Henriksen et
95 al., 1996b
Finland 1994- 17(20) Microcystin-LR > 10-800 HPLC Lahti et al.,
95 1997
France 1994 16(22) Microcystins 70-3,970 HPLC Vezie et al.,
1997
France, L. 1994 19(30) Microcystins 30-230 HPLC Vezie et al.,
Grand- 1998
Lieu
Germany 1992 8(15) Microcystin-LR 36-360 HPLC Fastner, 1994
Germany 1993 17(18) Microcystins 0.15-361,2 ELISA Ueno et al.,
1996b
Germany 1995- 385(533) Microcystins 1-5,000 HPLC Fastner, 1998
96
Germany 1997 34 Microcystins, 1-25,000 1 HPLC Chorus et al.,
several 1998
Japan 1990 12(14) Microcystin- 160-950 HPLC Watanabe et
RR, -YR, -LR al., 1992
Japan 1988- 11(19) Microcystin- 70-1,610 HPLC Park et al.,
92 RR, -YR, -LR, 1993a
[Dha7] -LR
Japan, 1980- 13 Microcystin- 30-2,100 HPLC Park et al.,
Lake 91 RR, -YR, -LR 1993b
Suwa
Japan 1986- 4(4) Microcystin- 100-860 HPLC Shirai et al.,
88 RR, -YR, -LR 1991
Japan 1992- 18(22) Microcystin- 0.04-480 1 HPLC Tsuji et al.,
95 RR, -YR, -LR 1996
Japan 1993- 46(57) Microcystins 0.05-1,300 1,2 ELISA Ueno et al.,
95 1996b
Japan 1993- 12(17) Microcystins 0.06-94 1,2 ELISA Nagata et al.,
94 1997
Japan 1989- 10(10) Microcystins 300-15,600 1,2 ELISA Nagata et al.,
94 1997
330-19,500 1,2 HPLC
Portugal 1989- 12(12) Microcystin-LR 1,000-7,100 HPLC Vasconcelos
92 plus six known et al., 1996
and three
unidentified
microcystins
Portugal 1994- 28(29) Microcystins 0.1-37 1,2 ELISA Ueno et al.,
95 1996b
South 1985- Microcystin- 5-420 HPLC Wicks and
Africa 86 FR, -LR, -YR, Thiel, 1990
-LA, -YA, -
LAba
South 1988- 9(9) Microcystin- 40-630 HPLC Scott, 1991
Africa 89 YR, -LR, -FR,
-YA, -LA, -
LAba
UK 1992 3(3) Microcystins, 3 17-131 1,2 HPLC Codd et al.,
1995
USA, 1993 9 Microcystins 1,900-12,800 2 ELISA McDermott et
Wisconsin al., 1995
Nodularins
Baltic Sea 1985- 17(23) Nodularin < 100-2,400 HPLC Sivonen et al.,
87 1989b
Baltic Sea 1990- 6(16) Nodularin 300-18,000 HPLC Kononen et
91 al., 1993
Tasmania, 1992- 7(9) Nodularin 2,000-3,500 HPLC Jones et al.,
Orielton 93 1994
Lagoon
Anatoxins
Denmark 1993- 9(10) Anatoxin-a(S) 4-3,300 3 ChE Henriksen et
95 inhibition al., 1997
assay
Finland 1985- 13(30) Anatoxin-a 10-4,400 GC/MS Sivonen et al.,
87 1989a
Finland 3(3) Anatoxin-a 0.4-2,600 LC/MS Harada et al.,
and Japan 1993
Germany 1995- 10(45) Anatoxin-a 0.02-0.36 1 GC-ECD Bumke-Vogt,
96 1998
Ireland 1995 2(2) Anatoxin-a 10-100 HPLC James et al.,
(fluorimetric) 1997
Japan 1988- 9(14) Anatoxin-a 0.3-16 TSP-LC/MS Park et al.,
92 1993a
Saxitoxins
Australia 1990- 11(11) Saxitoxins 85-2,040 HPLC and Humpage et
92 FAB-MS al., 1994
Australia 1992- 24(31) Saxitoxins 50-3,400 HPLC Negri et al.,
94 1997
USA 1994 7(8) Saxitoxins 5-60 4 HPLC/AOAC Carmichael et
al., 1997
dw Dry weight
HPLC High pressure liquid chromatography
ELISA Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
GC/MS Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry
LC/MS Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry
GC-ECD Gas chromatography-electron capture detection
TSP-LC/MS Thermospray-liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry
FAB-MS Fast atom bombardment-mass spectrometry
AOAC Mouse bioassay done according to the Association of Official Analytical Chemists
1 Given as µg l-1
2 Microcystin-LR used as standard
3 Measured by enzyme inhibition
4 Micrograms of STX equivalents
Figure 3.4 Cell-bound total microcystin content (measured by HPLC) of samples
taken in Denmark between 1993 and 1995 and dominated by different
cyanobacteria. Boxes show median values and the values within the 50 percentile
range; bars indicate the 10th and 90th percentile; n = number of samples (Modified
from Henriksen, 1996)
Further regional investigations are needed to clarify the toxins and species for which
toxin quotas may be reasonably stable and, thus, predictable.
The further development of quantitative, pre-concentration methods coupled with the
highly sensitive analytical methods noted above (see also Chapter 13) has also enabled
the measurement of very low concentrations of extracellular, dissolved toxins in water.
Data for dissolved toxin concentration, as reported in the scientific literature, are given in
Table 3.7. Prevalence and degradation of dissolved toxins in water are discussed in
section 3.4. Concentrations of microcystins dissolved in water vary from trace
concentrations up to 1,800 µg l-1 or higher, following the collapse of a large, highly toxic
bloom.
3.2.5 Seasonal variations in bloom toxin concentration
The timing and duration of the bloom season of cyanobacteria depends largely on the
climatic conditions of the region. In temperate zones, mass occurrences of
cyanobacteria are most prominent during the late summer and early autumn and may
last 2-4 months. In regions with more Mediterranean or subtropical climates, the bloom
season may start earlier and persist longer.
Figure 3.5 Cell-bound total microcystin content (measured by HPLC) of samples
taken in Germany between 1995 and 1996 dominated by different cyanobacteria. A.
On a dry weight basis; B. On a chlorophyll a basis; C. On a volume basis. (Micro.
spp = Microcystis spp.; Plankto. agardhii = Planktothrix agardhii; Plankto.
rubescens = Planktothrix rubescens) Boxes show median values and the values
within the 50 percentile range; bars indicate the 10th and 90th percentile; n =
number of samples (Modified from Fastner et at., 1998)
Table 3.7 Dissolved (extracellular) toxin concentrations measured in water samples
No. of toxic
Period
samples (total Toxin Concentration Analysis
Location of Reference
no. of identified (µg l-1) method
study
samples)
Australia 24 Microcystins 3-1.8001 HPLC Jones and
Orr, 1994
China 1993-94 130(835) Microcystins 0.05-1.6 ELISA Ueno et al.,
1996a
Finland 1993-94 38(38) Microcystin- 0.06-0,21 HPLC and Lahti et al.,
LR ELISA 1997
Germany 1993-94 11(19) Microcystins 0.07-0.76 ELISA Ueno et al.,
1996b
Japan 1992-95 9(22) Microcystin- 0.02-3.8 HPLC Tsuji et al.,
RR, -YR, -LR 1996
Japan 1993-95 26(38) Microcystins trace-5.6 ELISA Ueno et al.,
1996b
Japan 1993-94 4(13) Microcystins 0.08-0.8 ELISA Nagata et
al., 1997
Thailand 1994 7(10) Microcystins 0.08-0.35 ELISA Ueno et al.,
1996b
USA, 1993 27(27) Microcystins 0.07-200 ELISA McDermott
Wisconsin et al., 1995
HPLC High pressure liquid chromatography
ELISA Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
1 High range concentrations following treatment of a large bloom with algicide, which
released intracellular microcystins (see section 3.4)
In France, four months is not uncommon, and in Japan, Portugal, Spain, South Africa
and southern Australia blooms may occur for up to six months or longer. By contrast, in
dry years, in tropical or subtropical areas of China, Brazil and Australia, cyanobacterial
blooms may occur almost all year round, perhaps waning only briefly during reservoir
overturn.
In shallow lakes, particularly in north-western Europe, populations of Planktothrix
agardhii (Oscillatoria agardhii) may prevail perennially for many years. In deeper,
thermally stratified lakes and reservoirs with moderate nutrient pollution, Planktothrix
rubescens (Oscillatoria rubescens) may form blooms at the interface between the
warmer upper and colder deeper layers of water during summer, but maintain high,
evenly distributed density throughout the entire water body during winter. Both
Planktothrix species may contain high amounts of microcystins (see Figure 3.5). Blooms
of cyanobacteria, especially Planktothrix agardhii, have been found in winter under ice in
Scandinavian and German lakes and can thus be an all year round problem.
Although toxic cyanobacteria occur in a large number of lakes, reservoirs and rivers in
the world, quantitative reports on seasonal variation of cyanobacterial species
composition and toxin concentration are rare. Only a few studies on seasonal, spatial
and diel (day to night) variations in lakes have been published. Carmichael and Gorham
(1981) showed a high degree of spatial variation of bloom toxicity that was due mostly to
variations in the relative amounts of toxic Microcystis aeruginosa throughout the lake,
rather than to substantial variations in cell toxin content. Other measurements of toxin
concentrations in lakes have revealed similar trends; samples taken at the same time
from different parts of the lake may show wide divergence in cyanotoxin content
(Ekman-Ekebom et al., 1992; Kotak et al., 1995; Vezie et al., 1998). A study in Alberta,
Canada, showed considerable variation in toxin concentrations among the three lakes
studied, both within and between years, even though the lakes were located within the
same climatic region (Kotak et al., 1995).
In any year or season, individual water bodies have their own populations of
cyanobacteria and algae, the dominance of which is dependent not only on the weather,
but on the specific geochemical conditions of the lake. If there are no major changes in
these conditions, toxic blooms are likely to recur annually in those lakes that have a
history of toxic blooms (Wicks and Thiel, 1990; Ekman-Ekebom et al., 1992). Certain
species, including the highly toxic Planktothrix agardhii and P. Rubescens, are known to
produce maximum mass occurrences deep in the water column and which may be
overlooked by surface monitoring of waters. Such situations may also cause problems
for water treatment (see Chapters 2 and 9) (Lindholm and Meriluoto, 1991).
Studies over prolonged periods usually show that toxin concentration per gram dry
weight may vary substantially over a time scale of weeks to months, but rarely from day
to day as is sometimes reported. The maximum toxin concentration per gram dry weight
is usually reported in summer or autumn, when cyanobacterial biomass dominates dry
matter (Wicks and Thiel, 1990; Watanabe et al., 1992; Park et al., 1993b; Kotak et al.,
1995; Maršálek et al., 1995; Vezie et al., 1998). However, the time of toxin concentration
maximum and biomass maximum are not necessarily coincident. Thus, there can be
significant variation in the amount of toxin per mass of cyanobacteria over time,
independently of changes in the size of the cyanobacterial population. The explanations
for this are twofold. Firstly, there may be a waxing and waning of species or strains of
quite different toxin quotas (i.e. toxin content per cell). Secondly, the toxin quotas may
change up to five-fold in response to changes in environmental conditions (see section
3.3). A study by Kotak et al. (1995) found substantially higher concentrations of
microcystin in blooms during the day than at night, whereas a study from Australia found
no variation in microcystin content when samples were incubated during 24 hours at
different depths in a reservoir (Jones and Falconer, 1994). Both findings need to be
explored further.
High regional, seasonal, spatial, temporal and diel variations of toxin concentrations
indicate that predicting or modelling the occurrence of toxin concentrations requires a
comprehensive understanding of population (strain) development in different types of
aquatic ecosystems, as well as of the variability of their toxin quotas. Data bases for
such predictive models have yet to be compiled.
3.3 Production and regulation
Laboratory studies with pure strains of cyanobacteria have found that environmental
factors can induce changes in toxicity or toxin concentration (on a per unit biomass
basis), but usually by a factor of no more than three or four. On a per cell basis, the
changes in toxin content are probably even smaller. These environmentally-induced
changes are far less than the range of more than three orders of magnitude in toxin
content measured between individual strains grown in culture under identical conditions.
This lends support to the assumption that much, if not most, of the variation in toxicity of
"monospecific" natural blooms is the waxing and waning of strains of the same species,
but with varying toxin quotas. The factors that control the growth and toxin content of
individual strains are as yet unknown, but clearly the genetic regulation of cyanotoxin
production is an important area for further study and understanding (see section 3.3.3).
Both toxigenic (toxin producing) and non-toxigenic strains exist within many species of
cyanobacteria. When grown in the laboratory, particular strains always produce much
greater amounts of toxins than others. Indeed, the difference may be as much as three
orders of magnitude or more (Bolch et al., 1997). Several attempts to differentiate toxin
producing (toxigenic) from non-toxic strains of the same species using microscopic
methods have failed. The use of molecular biological methods to characterise toxic and
non-toxic planktonic isolates has been initiated recently and will, in future, help to clarify
the taxonomic status of these organisms, as well as the ecology of individual strain types
(see section 3.3.3).
3.3.1 Regulation by chemical and physical factors
The production of toxin by a single cyanobacterial strain seems to be consistent and the
spontaneous and permanent loss of toxin production has been seldom reported. The
effects of several environmental factors on growth and toxin production by cyanobacteria
have been studied in batch and continuous culture experiments. Culture age in batch
cultures, and temperature, are the parameters most frequently examined, followed by
light, nutrients, salinity, pH and micronutrient concentrations. Studies have been done
with hepatotoxic Microcystis, Oscillatoria (Planktothrix), Anabaena and Nodularia;
anatoxin-a producing Anabaena, Aphanizomenon and Planktothrix; and saxitoxin
producing Aphanizomenon and Anabaena circinalis (Table 3.8). Microcystins and
anatoxin-a are largely retained within cells when the conditions for the growth of the
organism are favourable. The amount of microcystin in a culture increases during the
logarithmic growth phase, being highest in the late logarithmic phase. The maximum
anatoxin-a concentration is found during the logarithmic growth phase (Sivonen, 1996;
Watanabe, 1996). While the variants of microcystins produced by a particular strain are
rather constant, the ratios of individual microcystins may change with time, or under
conditions of different temperatures and light. Environmental factors affect toxin content
of cyanobacteria, but only within a range of less than an order of magnitude. The
majority of studies indicate that cyanobacteria produce most toxins under conditions
which are most favourable for their growth. For example, different cyanobacterial
species have different light requirements: Planktothrix prefers low light intensities for
growth, Anabaena moderate and Aphanizomenon high light intensities. All strains
produce most toxin when grown under their optimum light conditions (Table 3.8). Two- to
threefold differences in toxin content (on a per unit biomass basis) have been reported in
relation to light conditions.
Strains and species also differ slightly in their optimum growth temperatures. The toxin
content in most studies was highest at temperatures between 18 °C and 25 °C, whereas
low (10 °C) or very high temperatures (30 °C) decreased toxin content. Temperature
gradients caused two- to threefold differences in toxin content.
In a study using mouse bioassay to detect effects of pH on toxin production, cells were
found to be more toxic when grown at high and low pH (Van der Westhuizen and Eloff,
1983).
Table 3.8 Laboratory studies on cellular toxin concentrations in cyanobacteria
Changes in
Toxin(s)/ Highest/lowest
toxin
Parameter Organism analysis toxin Reference(s)
concentrations
method production
(dw)
Temperature (°C)
12.5-30 Anabaena spp. Microcystins 3.5-30 fold1 Highest at 25, Rapala et al.,
(2 strains), batch HPLC lowest at 30; 1997
cultures different toxins
at different
temperatures
10-28 Anabaena spp. Microcystins 3-10 fold Lowest at 10, Rapala and
(2 strains), HPLC highest at 25 Sivonen, 1998
continuous
cultures
15-30 Anabaena spp. Anatoxin-a 3 fold Lowest at 30, Rapala et al.,
(2 strains), batch HPLC highest at 20 1993
cultures
10-28 Anabaena spp. Anatoxin-a 4-7 fold Highest at 19- Rapala and
(2 strains), HPLC 21, lowest at 10 Sivonen, 1998
continuous and 28
cultures
15-30 Aphanizomenon Anatoxin-a 3 fold Lowest at 30, Rapala et al.,
sp. (1 strain), HPLC highest at 20 1993
batch cultures
10,25,34 Microcystis Microcystins 5 fold Highest toxicity Codd and
aeruginosa (1 mouse at 25, lowest at Poon, 1988
strain), batch bioassay 10
cultures
15-35 Microcystis Microcystins 4 fold Highest toxicity van der
aeruginosa (1 mouse at 20; different Westhuizen
strain) batch bioassay toxins at and Eloff,
cultures HPLC different 1985; van der
temperatures Westhuizen et
al., 1986
18,25,35 Microcystis Microcystins 1.4 fold Highest toxicity Watanabe
aeruginosa (1 mouse at 18, lowest at and Oishi,
strain), batch bioassay 32 1985
cultures
10-30 Nodularia Nodularin 3-4 fold Highest at 20, Lehtimäki et
spumigena (2 HPLC lowest at 10 or al., 1994
strains), batch 30
cultures
7-28 Nodularia Nodularin 3 fold Highest at 19 Lehtimäki et
spumigena (1 HPLC al., 1997
strain), batch
cultures
15-30 Oscillatoria Microcystins 7 fold Strain Sivonen,
agardhii (2 HPLC dependent; 1990b
strains), batch lowest at 30
cultures
Light (µmol m-2 s-1)
2-100 Anabaena spp. Microcystins 3 fold Highest at 25 Rapala et al.,
continuous (2 strains), batch HPLC 1997
cultures
7, 19, 42 Anabaena spp. Microcystins 2.5-15 Lowest at 10, Rapala and
continuous (2 strains), HPLC highest at 25 Sivonen, 1998
continuous
cultures
2-128 Anabaena spp. Anatoxin-a 3 fold Highest at 26- Rapala et al.,
continuous (2 strains), batch HPLC 44, lowest at 2 1993
cultures
7, 19, 42 Anabaena spp. Anatoxin-a No effect Highest at 19, Rapala and
continuous (2 strains), HPLC lowest at 7 Sivonen, 1998
continuous
cultures
2-128 Aphanizomenon Anatoxin-a 4 fold Highest at 128, Rapala et al.,
continuous sp. (1 strain), HPLC lowest at 2 1993
batch cultures
5-50 Microcystis Microcystins 2.4 fold Highest toxicity Codd and
continuous aeruginosa (1 mouse at 20 Poon, 1988
strain), batch bioassay
cultures
20-75 Microcystis Microcystins 2.5 fold Highest at 40 Utkilen and
continuous aeruginosa (1 HPLC Gjølme, 1992
strain),
continuous
cultures
21-205 Microcystis Microcystins 1.2 fold Highest toxicity van der
continuous aeruginosa (1 mouse at 142, lowest at Westhuizen
strain), batch bioassay 21 and Eloff,
cultures 1985
7.5, 30, 75 Microcystis Microcystins 3.8 fold Highest toxicity Watanabe
continuous aeruginosa (1 mouse at 30, lowest at and Oishi,
strain), batch bioassay 7.5 1985
cultures
25, 50, 80 Nodularia Nodularin No difference Lehtimäki et
continuous spumigena (2 HPLC al., 1994
strains), batch
cultures
2-155 Nodularia Nodularin 50 fold1 Higher at high Lehtimäki et
continuous spumigena (1 HPLC irradiances, al., 1997
strain), batch minimal at 2
cultures
12-95 Oscillatoria Microcystins 2.5 fold Highest at 12-44 Sivonen,
continuous agardhii (2 HPLC 1990b
strains), batch
cultures
Phosphorus (mg P l-1)
0.05-5.5 Anabaena spp. Microcystins 5 fold Highest at 5.5, Rapala et al.,
(2 strains), batch HPLC lowest at 0.05 1997
cultures
0.05-5.5 Anabaena spp. Anatoxin-a No difference No statistically Rapala et al.,
(2 strains), batch HPLC significant 1993
cultures differences
0.05-5.5 Aphanizomenon Anatoxin-a 2 fold Lowest at 0.05- Rapala et al.,
sp. (2 strains), HPLC 0.1, highest at 1993
batch cultures 0.5-5.5
BG-11 and Microcystis Microcystins 1.7 fold Higher toxicity Codd and
medium aeruginosa (1 Mouse without P Poon, 1988
without P strain), batch bioassay
cultures
0.0025, 0.025 Microcystis Microcystins 2.3 fold More toxin at Utkilen and
aeruginosa (1 HPLC 0.025 Gjølme, 1995
strain),
continuous
cultures
MA medium Microcystis Microcystins Less than 1 Highest toxicity Watanabe
1/1; dilutions aeruginosa (1 Mouse with the original and Oishi,
1/10, 1/20 strain), batch bioassay medium 1985
cultures
0.1-5.5 Oscillatoria Microcystins 1.8-2.5 fold Lowest toxin at Sivonen,
agardhii (2 HPLC 0.1 1990b
strains), batch
cultures
0.3, 0.6, 1.0 Nodularia Nodularin Less than 1 fold Lowest at 0.3 Lehtimäki et
spumigena (2 HPLC al., 1994
strains), batch
cultures
0-5.5 Nodularia Nodularin 4 fold Lowest at 0- Lehtimäki et
spumigena (1 HPLC 0.02, highest at al., 1997
strain), batch 0.2-5.5
cultures
Nitrogen (mg N l-1)
BG-11 Microcystis Microcystins 5 fold Higher toxicity Codd and
medium, aeruginosa (1 mouse with the medium Poon, 1988
medium strain), batch bioassay containing N
without N cultures
0.05-1 Microcystis Microcystins 3 fold Higher at high N Utkilen and
aeruginosa (1 HPLC Gjølme, 1995
strain),
continuous
cultures
MA medium Microcystis Microcystins 2.5 fold Highest toxicity Watanabe
1/1; dilutions aeruginosa (1 mouse with the original and Oishi,
1/10, 1/20 strain), batch bioassay medium 1985
cultures
0.42-84 Oscillatoria Microcystins 5 fold Higher at high Sivonen,
agardhii (2 HPLC N, lowest at low 1990b
strains), batch N
cultures
Micronutrients
Al, Cd, Cr, Cu, Microcystis Microcystins 1.7 fold Less toxins at Lukac and
Fe, Mn, Ni, Sn, aeruginosa (1 HPLC low Fe Aegerter,
Zn; various strain), batch concentrations 1993
concentrations cultures
0.1-3.4 µg Fe l- Microcystis Microcystins 1.5 fold More toxin at Utkilen and
1 aeruginosa (1 HPLC high Fe Gjølme, 1995
strain), concentrations
continuous
cultures
0.03-1.2 µg Fe Microcystis Microcystins 0-3 fold Less toxin at Lyck et al.,
l-1 aeruginosa (1 HPLC low Fe 1966
strain), concentrations
continuous
cultures
Salinity (‰)
3, 5, 8, 11 Nodularia Nodularin No difference No statistical Lehtimäki et
spumigena (2 HPLC difference al., 1994
strains), batch
cultures
0-30 Nodularia Nodularin 8 fold Highest at 15, Lehtimäki et
spumigena (1 HPLC lowest at 0 and al., 1997
strain), batch 30
cultures
0-35 Nodularia Nodularin 5 fold Highest at 12, Blackburn et
spumigena (6 HPLC lowest at 35 al., 1996
strains), batch
cultures
CO
2
BG-11 Microcystis Microcystins 6 fold Higher toxicity Codd and
medium, aeruginosa (1 mouse with the medium Poon, 1988
medium strain), batch bioassay containing CO
2
without CO culture
2
pH
1-14 Microcystis Microcystins 1.8 fold Toxicity highest van der
aeruginosa (1 mouse at low and high Westhuizen
strain), batch bioassay pH and Eloff,
cultures 1983
dw Dry weight
HPLC High performance liquid chromatography
1 When the growth of the strains was poor the amount of toxins was also very low (less
than 0.1 mg g-1 dw of cells); when these cases were compared to maximal toxin
production more than ten-fold differences could be seen
In high concentrations of phosphorus, hepatotoxic strains produced more toxins, but for
anatoxin-a production phosphorus had no effect (Table 3.8). The differences induced by
low and high phosphorus concentrations vary between two- and fourfold. Similarly, in
field studies, a positive correlation of total phosphorus with microcystin-LR concentration
in cells of Microcystis aeruginosa (Kotak et al., 1995) or in bloom material of Microcystis
spp. (Lahti et al., 1997b) has been found. Non-nitrogen fixing species, like Microcystis
and Oscillatoria, produce more toxins under nitrogen-rich conditions. Nitrogen fixing
species are not dependent on the nitrogen in the media for their toxin production (Rapala
et al., 1993; Lehtimäki et al., 1997). In continuous cultures when the toxins were
expressed in relation to cell protein rather than to dry weight, Utkilen and Gjølme (1995)
found that nitrogen and phosphorus limited conditions had no effect on the toxin content
of Microcystis aeruginosa.
Indications regarding the role of iron are contradictory (Lukac and Aegerther, 1993;
Utkilen and Gjølme, 1995; Lyck et al., 1996). While studying the effect of trace metals on
growth and on toxin content of Microcystis aeruginosa, Lukac and Aegerter (1993) found
that in batch cultures only zinc was required for both optimal growth and toxin production.
Orr and Jones (1998) have unified many of these rather disparate studies on the effect
of growth conditions on cyanotoxin production. They showed that the rate of microcystin
production by a cyanobacterial population in culture is directly proportional to its growth
rate, no matter what environmental factor was limiting growth. Moreover, they showed
that the amount of microcystin contained by a single cell of Microcystis aeruginosa (i.e.
on a per cell or cell quota basis) is constant within a narrow range (two- to threefold).
3.3.2 Biosynthesis
To understand how cyanotoxins are produced, it is necessary to study the biochemical
and genetic basis of toxin production. Knowledge of the biosynthetic pathways of
cyanotoxins is in its early stage and no complete biochemical pathways are known.
Biosynthesis of several cyanotoxins has been studied by feeding labelled precursors to a
cyanobacterial culture and following their incorporation into the carbon skeleton of the
toxins. Shimizu et al. (1984) used an Aphanizomenon flos-aquae strain to study
biosynthesis of saxitoxin analogues. They proposed a new pathway for neosaxitoxin
biosynthesis, the key steps of which are the condensation of an acetate unit, or its
derivative, to the amino group bearing an α-carbon of arginine or an equivalent, and a
subsequent loss of the carboxyl carbon and imidazole ring formation on the adjacent
carbonyl carbon. They established the origin of all the carbons in the toxin alkaloid ring
system. The side-chain carbon was derived from methionine (Shimizu, 1986).
Anatoxin-a is related structurally to the tropane class of alkaloids found in higher plants.
Based mainly on 14C-labelled precursors and enzymatic studies, Gallon et al. (1990) and
Gallon et al. (1994) suggested the biosynthesis of anatoxin-a to be analogous to that of
tropanes. Anatoxin-a was proposed to be formed from ornithine/arginine via putrescine,
which is oxidised to pyrroline, a precursor of anatoxin-a. Labelling experiments using 13C
NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometry) indicated that the carbon skeleton of
anatoxin-a is derived from acetate and glutamate. The studies showed that C-1 of
glutamic acid is retained during the transformation of anatoxin-a and not lost by
decarboxylation, a finding incompatible with the tropane alkaloid theory (Hemscheidt et
al., 1995b). All of the carbons of anatoxin-a(S) are derived from amino acids. Three
methyl carbons arise from L-methionine or other donors to the tetrahydrofolate C1 pool.
L-arginine accounts for C-2, C-4, C-5 and C-6 carbons of the toxin (Moore et al., 1992,
1993). The intermediate in the biosynthesis of anatoxin-a(S) from L arginine is (2S,4S)-4
hydroxyarginine (Hemscheidt et al., 1995a). The structure of the cylindrospermopsin
suggests a polyketide origin for the toxin (Moore et al., 1993).
The origin of carbons in microcystin (Moore et al., 1991) and in nodularin (Choi et al.,
1993; Rinehart et al., 1994) have been studied by following the incorporation of labelled
precursors into the toxins by NMR. Carbons C1-C8 of Adda in nodularin are acetate
derived and the remaining carbons presumably originate from phenylalanine. Methyl
groups in carbons 2, 4, 6, 8, and the O-methyl group in the Adda unit, originated from
methionine. The D-Glu and L-Arg carbons C4-C5 were acetate derived, with C1-C2
being from glutamate. Methyldehydrobutyrine was possibly formed from threonine, its
methyl group coming from methionine. The β-methylaspartic acid was found to originate
from condensation of pyruvic acid (C3-C4) and acetyl-CoA (C1-C2) (Rinehart et al.,
1994). The studies on the carbon skeleton of nodularin, with some minor differences,
agree with work on microcystin-LR by Moore et al. (1991). In their study, L-Leu and D-
Ala units in microcystin had acetate incorporation. The dehydroamino acid in microcystin
has been proposed to be formed from serine rather than from threonine (Rinehart et al.,
1994). Rinehart's group found linear nodularin, which was shown by culture experiments
to be a precursor of cyclic nodularin. Three additional linear peptides were isolated from
a bloom sample, one of them was possibly a precursor of cyclic microcystin-LR and the
others possibly degradation products (Rinehart et al., 1994).
3.3.3 Genetic regulation of cyanotoxin production
The genes and enzymes involved in cyanotoxin production are still mostly unknown. The
first molecular biological studies on toxic cyanobacteria investigated the possible
involvement of plasmids in toxin production. Four toxic strains of Microcystis aeruginosa
contained plasmids, and no plasmid could be shown in one toxic and in several non-
toxic strains (Schwabe et al., 1988). More recently, a similar study in Australia found no
evidence for plasmid involvement in microcystin synthesis (Bolch et al., 1997). Gallon et
al. (1994) studied an anatoxin-a producing Anabaena strain NCR 44-1, which
spontaneously became non-toxic. They found that the size of a plasmid was reduced in
that non-toxic clone, but this work has not been repeated or confirmed.
Multi-enzyme complexes and peptide synthetase genes are involved in hepatotoxin
production. Several cyclic and linear peptides, often with D-amino acids, are known to be
produced, non-ribosomally, by multi-domain peptide synthetases via the so-called
thiotemplate mechanism in bacteria and lower eukaryotes. The best characterised are
the synthesis of gramicidin S and tyrocidin by Bacillus. Peptide synthetase genes have
been detected and sequenced (partly) in Microcystis aeruginosa (Meissner et al., 1996)
and in Anabaena (Rouhiainen et al., 1994). Analogous polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
products to the peptide synthetase genes have been shown by using DNA from
Microcystis (Jacobs et al., 1995; Arment and Carmichael, 1996) and Nodularia as a
template. Dittman et al. (1997) showed, in knockout experiments, that peptide
synthetase genes are responsible for microcystin production.
At least some strains which produce hepatotoxins also produce other small cyclic
peptides (Namikoshi and Rinehart, 1996; Weckesser et al., 1996) which are likely to be
produced by nonribosomal peptide synthesis.
3.4 Fate in the environment
3.4.1 Partitioning between cells and water
It appears likely that cyanotoxins are produced and contained within the actively growing
cyanobacterial cells (i.e. they are intracellular or particulate). Release to the surrounding
water, to form dissolved toxin, appears to occur mostly, if not exclusively, during cell
senescence, death and lysis, rather than by continuous excretion.
In laboratory studies, where both intracellular and dissolved toxins
(microcystins/nodularin and saxitoxins) have been measured, it is generally the case that
in healthy log phase cultures, less than 10-20 per cent of the total toxin pool is
extracellular (Sivonen, 1990b; Lehtimäki et al., 1997; Negri et al., 1997; Rapala et al.,
1997). As cells enter stationary phase the increased rate of cell death may lead to an
increase in the extracellular dissolved fraction. Even during log-phase cell growth in
culture, a small percentage of cells in the population may be dying and lysing (and
releasing intracellular toxins), even though there is an overall positive population growth.
There are some indications that anatoxin-a may leak out of cells during growth
especially in low light conditions. High concentrations of anatoxin-a, sometimes
exceeding the intracellular pool of toxins, have been found in media in a batch culture
study (Bumke-Vogt et al., 1996).
In the field, healthy bloom populations produce little extracellular toxin. The range of
measured concentrations for dissolved cyanotoxins, in all cases except those where a
major bloom is obviously breaking down, is 0.1-10 µg l-1 (Lindholm and Meriluoto, 1991;
Jones and Orr, 1994; Tsuji et al., 1996; Ueno et al., 1996b; Lahti et al., 1997b) Cell-
bound concentrations are several orders of magnitude higher (see Tables 3.6 and 3.7).
In lakes or rivers, toxins liberated from cells are rapidly diluted by the large mass of
water, especially if mixing of water by wind action or currents is vigorous (Jones and Orr,
1994). However, the concentration of dissolved toxins may be much higher in ageing or
declining blooms. This is an important consideration for water treatment plant operators,
because it means that removal of healthy cyanobacterial cells intact from the raw water
supply may obviate or substantially reduce the need for additional adsorptive (activated
carbon) or oxidative (ozone or chlorine) toxin removal processes (see Chapter 9).
The release of toxins from cells is enhanced by chemical treatments for the eradication
of cyanobacteria, especially the use of algicides (either copper-based or organic
herbicides). Treatment of a bloom with copper sulphate, for example, may lead to
complete lysis of the bloom population within three days and release of all the toxins into
the surrounding water (Berg et al., 1987; Kenefick et al., 1992; Jones and Orr, 1994).
The efficacy of copper sulphate treatment is, however, very much dependent on water
chemistry, especially alkalinity, pH and dissolved organic content (see sections 8.5 and
9.2).
3.4.2 Chemical breakdown
The four main groups of cyanotoxins: microcystins, anatoxins, PSPs and
cylindrospermopsins, exhibit quite different chemical stabilities and biological activities in
water.
Microcystins
Microcystins, being cyclic peptides, are extremely stable and resistant to chemical
hydrolysis or oxidation at near neutral pH. Microcystins and nodularin remain potent
even after boiling. In natural waters and in the dark, microcystins may persist for months
or years. At high temperatures (40 °C) and at elevated or low pH, slow hydrolysis has
been observed, with the times to achieve greater than 90 per cent breakdown being
approximately 10 weeks at pH 1 and greater than 12 weeks at pH 9 (Harada et al.,
1996). Rapid chemical hydrolysis occurs only under conditions that are unlikely to be
attained outside the laboratory, e.g. 6M HCl at high temperature.
Microcystins can be oxidised by ozone and other strong oxidising agents, and degraded
by intense ultra violet (UV) light. These processes have relevance for water treatment
and are discussed in Chapter 9, although they are unlikely to contribute to degradation
occurring in the natural environment.
In full sunlight, microcystins undergo slow photochemical breakdown and isomerisation,
with the reaction rate being enhanced by the presence of water-soluble cell pigments,
presumably phycobiliproteins (Tsuji et al., 1993). In the presence of pigments the
photochemical breakdown of microcystin in full sunlight can take as little as two weeks
for greater than 90 per cent breakdown, or longer than six weeks, depending on the
concentration of pigment (and presumably toxin, although this has not been tested). A
more rapid breakdown under sunlight has been reported in the presence of humic
substances (which can act as photosensitisers) in field concentrations ranging from 2-16
mg l-1 dissolved organic carbon (DOC). Approximately 40 per cent of the microcystins
was degraded per day under summer conditions of insolation (Welker and Steinberg,
1998). In deeper or muddy waters, the rate of breakdown is likely to be considerably
slower.
Anatoxins
Anatoxin-a is relatively stable in the dark, but in pure solution in the absence of pigments
it undergoes rapid photochemical degradation in sunlight. Breakdown is further
accelerated by alkaline conditions (Stevens and Krieger, 1991). The half-life for
photochemical breakdown is 1-2 hours. Under normal day and night light conditions at
pH 8 or pH 10, and at low initial concentrations (10 µg l-1), the half-life for anatoxin-a
breakdown was found to be approximately 14 days (Smith and Sutton, 1993). Anatoxin-
a(S) decomposes rapidly in basic solutions but is relatively stable under neutral and
acidic conditions (Matsunaga et al., 1989).
Saxitoxins
In the dark at room temperature, saxitoxins undergo a series of slow chemical hydrolysis
reactions. The C-toxins lose the N-sulphocarbamoyl group to form decarbamoyl
gonyautoxins (dc-GTXs); while the dc-GTXs, GTXs and STXs slowly degrade to, as yet
unidentified, non-toxic products. The half-lives for the breakdown reactions are in the
order of 1-10 weeks, with more than three months often being required for greater than
90 per cent breakdown (Jones and Negri, 1997). Because dc-GTXs are much more toxic
than C-toxins (by a factor of 10-100), a solution or water body containing a natural
mixture of C-toxins and GTXs, for example from the lysis of an Australian bloom of
Anabaena circinalis, will actually increase in toxicity over a period of up to three weeks,
before toxicity begins to abate during the succeeding 2-3 months. Boiling an extract of
Anabaena with predominant C-toxins may also substantially increase toxicity. Similar
transformation reactions occur in living cells as they age in culture or in a natural bloom
(Negri et al., 1997). No detailed studies have been carried out on saxitoxin breakdown in
sunlight, either with or without pigments.
Cylindrospermopsins
Cylindrospermopsin is relatively stable in the dark, with slow breakdown occurring at
elevated temperature (50 °C) (Chiswell et al., 1999). In sunlight and in the presence of
cell pigments, breakdown occurs quite rapidly being more than 90 per cent complete
within 2-3 days (Chiswell et al., 1999). Pure cylindrospermopsin is relatively stable in
sunlight.
3.4.3 Removal on natural sediments and soils
Microcystins appear to be retained only weakly on natural suspended solids in rivers and
reservoirs; usually no more than 20 per cent of the total microcystin concentration is
adsorbed. In a laboratory experiment, some of the dissolved anatoxin-a and microcystins
were reported by Rapala et al. (1993) to be adsorbed on lake sediments. Percolation
through clay soils may provide some cyanotoxin removal, but this will depend greatly on
the type of clay, surface charge, cation concentration of the water, etc. Cyanobacterial
cells and microcystins were retained in soil columns, but less efficiently in sediment
columns, in laboratory experiments simulating the fate of cyanobacterial toxins in
artificial recharge of groundwater and bank filtration (Lahti el al., 1996). No data are
available for other cyanobacterial toxins, but some removal may be expected, again
depending on the chemical conditions of soil and water.
Sedimentation of living cells without lysis, for example through grazing by zooplankton
and sinking of faecal pellets, may lead to accumulation and persistence of toxin material
in sediments, although this process has received little scientific attention. As discussed
in more detail below, microcystins retained in intact cells may persist for several months.
Cells deposited in sediments may be subject to fairly rapid breakdown by sediment
bacteria and protozoa, with the resultant release of toxins.
3.4.4 Biodegradation
Microcystins
In spite of their chemical stability and resistance to eucaryotic and many bacterial
peptidases, microcystins are susceptible to breakdown by aquatic bacteria found
naturally in rivers and reservoirs. These bacteria appear to be reasonably common and
widespread. Degradative bacteria have been found in sewage effluent (Lam et al., 1995),
lake water (Jones et al., 1994; Cousins et al., 1996; Lahti et al., 1997a), lake sediment
(Rapala et al., 1994; Lahti et al., 1997a) and river water (Jones et al., 1994).
Nonetheless, one Finnish study showed a complete lack of degradation of microcystin
over a three-month period by an inoculum taken in winter from the Vantaanjoki River
(Kiviranta et al., 1991). There is usually an initial lag phase with little loss of microcystin
and this period can be as short as two days or more than three weeks, depending on the
water body, climatic conditions, the concentration of dissolved microcystin and in some
cases, although not all, the previous bloom history of a lake (Jones et al., 1994; Rapala
et al., 1994; Lahti et al., 1997b). Once the biodegradation process commences, removal
of microcystin can be more than 90 per cent complete within 2-10 days. This may vary
depending on the water body, initial microcystin concentration and water temperature
(Jones et al., 1994; Lahti et al., 1997b).
Jones et al. (1994) isolated a species of aquatic Sphingomonas that initiated ring-
opening of microcystin-LR to produce linear (acyclo-)microcystin-LR as a transient
intermediate (Bourne et al., 1996). This compound was nearly 200 times less toxic than
the parent toxin. The products of complete bacterial degradation were non-toxic to mice
at doses up to 500 µg kg-1 (compared with an LD for microcystin-LR of about 60 µg kg-1).
50
The same bacterium, however, did not degrade the closely related cyclic pentapeptide
nodularin. In a strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa from a Japanese lake, microcystin
degradation appeared to proceed by attack on the Adda side chain of microcystin
(Takenaka and Watanabe, 1997). Several bacteria were isolated from lake water and
sediment in Finland capable of degradation of microcystins and some strains also
degraded nodularin. One strain was identified as a Sphingomonas sp. and two of the
strains belonged to the beta-subgroup of Proteobacteria, although the genera remains to
be determined (Lahti et al., 1997a).
Other cyanobacterial toxins
Little work has been undertaken on the biodegradation of anatoxins, saxitoxins or
cylindrospermopsin. Anatoxin-a may be readily degraded by bacteria associated with
cyanobacterial filaments. Laboratory studies using non-axenic strains of cyanobacteria
found low concentrations of dissolved anatoxin-a in the culture medium (Kiviranta et al.,
1991; Rapala et al., 1993) whereas high concentrations of anatoxin-a were found in the
medium of a continuous culture using an axenic strain (free of contaminating bacteria) of
the same species (Rapala and Sivonen, 1998). A Pseudomonas sp. strain able to
degrade anatoxin-a at a rate of 6-10 µg ml-1 per three days was isolated by Kiviranta et al.
(1991). In the presence of lake sediment and natural bacteria, the half-life for breakdown
of anatoxin-a in the laboratory was about five days (Smith and Sutton, 1993). In a recent
study by Jones and Negri (1997) no bacterially-mediated degradation of saxitoxins from
Anabaena circinalis was observed in a range of surface water samples.
3.4.5 Bioaccumulation
Microcystins bioaccumulate in common aquatic vertebrates and invertebrates, including
fish (Carbis et al., 1997; Beattie et al., 1998), mussels (Eriksson et al., 1989; Falconer et
al., 1992; Prepas et al., 1997; Watanabe et al., 1997) and zooplankton (Watanabe et al.,
1992). In mussels, the highest microcystin concentrations are found in the
hepatopancreas, and in vertebrates they are found in the liver. Williams et al., (1997)
have shown covalent binding and accumulation of microcystin-LR in salmon liver and
crab larvae. Whether the levels of microcystin accumulation are sufficient to pose a risk
to humans is uncertain, and will depend on levels of consumption and the severity of
toxic blooms in the area where fish or shellfish are caught or collected. Common advice
given by water authorities is that the viscera of the fish should not be eaten, but caution
should be taken in all cases where major toxic blooms occur.
Saxitoxins from marine "red tide" dinoflagellates are well known for their propensity to
bioaccumulate in marine vertebrates and invertebrates, often with disastrous
consequences for animals and humans that consume them. Similarly, saxitoxins from
the freshwater cyanobacterium Anabaena circinalis may bioaccumulate in an Australian
species of freshwater mussel to concentrations exceeding international guidelines
(Shumway et al., 1995) during as little as seven days exposure to a cell density of
100,000 cells per ml of a toxigenic strain (Negri and Jones, 1995). This cell density is
commonly encountered in natural blooms of this species.
3.4.6 Persistence and stability in cells
Culture studies indicate that microcystins and nodularin degrade only very slowly (time
scale of weeks), if at all, whilst contained within living cells (Sivonen, 1990b; Lehtimäki et
al., 1994, 1997; Rapala et al., 1997; Orr and Jones, 1998). Similarly, scums of
Microcystis aeruginosa that dry on the shores of lakes may contain high concentrations
of microcystin for several months (Jones et al., 1995). These toxins are released back
into the water body when re-immersed. Thus there is the potential for significant
localised concentrations of dissolved microcystin even in the absence of living cells or a
recently collapsed bloom.
In a lake study carried out over two summer - autumn periods, Lahti et al. (1997b) found
that dissolved microcystin was more persistent than particulate toxin, with 30 and 15
days respectively required for 90 per cent degradation to occur.
3.5 Impact on aquatic biota
Direct cyanobacterial poisoning of animals can occur by two routes: through
consumption of cyanobacterial cells from the water, or indirectly through consumption of
other animals that have themselves fed on cyanobacteria and accumulated cyanotoxins.
As was outlined in section 3.4.5, cyanotoxins are known to bioaccumulate in common
aquatic vertebrates and invertebrates, including fish, mussels and zooplankton.
Consequently, there is considerable potential for toxic effects to be magnified in aquatic
food chains. Such toxicity biomagnification is well known for anthropogenic pollutants
such as heavy metals and pesticides. There is no reason to suspect that the situation
would be any different with natural cyanotoxins.
It is difficult to ascribe the deaths of natural populations of aquatic animals, especially
fish, unequivocally to cyanotoxin poisoning. One of the main reasons for this is because
the collapse of a large cyanobacterial bloom can lead to very low concentrations of
oxygen in the water column as a consequence of bacterial metabolism; consequent fish
deaths may be due to the anoxia. The best evidence for the potential for toxic effects on
aquatic organisms comes from controlled laboratory trials with exposure of animals to
toxic cyanobacteria or cell-free solutions of cyanotoxins.
3.5.1 Effects on aquatic bacteria
The influence of cyanobacterial toxins on bacteria is not fully understood and the
scientific literature gives a number of contradictory statements. According to some
authors neither an extract of Microcystis aeruginosa nor pure microcystin-LR have a
biocidal effect on Bacillus subtilis, Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli or
Pseudomonas hydrophila (Foxall and Sasner, 1988). However, these limited tests
should not be seen as general indicators of the potential impacts of cyanotoxins on
aquatic bacteria. The majority of aquatic bacteria are yet to be cultured, and studies with
common mammalian pathogens or "laboratory" bacteria should not be taken as all
encompassing. It is quite possible that cyanotoxins impact on some species of aquatic
bacteria and not others. Certainly, microcystins are not toxic to all bacteria because
several species are known to degrade quite high concentrations of these toxins (see
section 3.4.4). It is even possible that the slow release of cyanotoxins from the cell
surface or from senescent cells may stimulate associations of particular bacterial types
(see section 3.4.4) which may even act as symbionts.
Attempts have been made to use bacterial toxicity tests (based on inhibition of bacterial
phosphorescence) to screen for the presence of cyanotoxins, especially microcystins.
However it appears that the inhibition of bacterial phosphorescence is not related to the
commonly known cyanotoxins. It has been suggested that the negative effect may be
related to the presence of unidentified LPS endotoxins in the cell wall of the
cyanobacterial cells (see sections 3.1 and 13.3).
3.5.2 Effects on zooplankton
Evidence of the potential effects of cyanotoxins on zooplankton from numerous studies,
mostly in laboratory situations, is complex and inconsistent. The vast majority of
published studies has been based on mouse bioassay data describing cyanobacterial
toxicity, with only a few more recent studies having used analytical methods such as
HPLC (see section 13.4) to quantify individual toxins. Overall, it appears that
cyanobacteria may exhibit a deleterious effect on zooplankton, but the effect is highly
variable between genera and species, and even between clones of individual
zooplankton species. One of the main questions yet to be resolved is whether the
observed inhibitory effects are due to the putative poor nutritional value of cyanobacteria,
to the known cyanotoxins, or to other unidentified compounds. There is evidence in the
literature to support all three effects as being significant, at least with particular species
under experimental growth conditions. A major difference in study design is whether
organisms are exposed to cyanotoxins dissolved in water, or fed with toxic
cyanobacteria. The latter is likely to lead to a substantially higher dose. Furthermore,
Jungmann and Benndorf (1994) reported that exposure of Daphnia to dissolved
microcystins showed effects only at concentrations several orders of magnitude above
those found in field samples. They did, however, observe toxicity to Daphnia by
unidentified metabolites other than microcystins from Microcystis.
There is dramatic variation among zooplankton species in their response to toxic (and
even non-toxic) cyanobacteria. For example, DeMott et al. (1991) showed that the four
species of zooplankton differed in their sensitivity to hepatotoxins by almost two orders
of magnitude, but toxicity was observed only at very high concentrations that are
scarcely encountered in natural water bodies (48 h LC ranging from 450 to 21,400 µg
50
of microcystin per litre). Snell (1980) found that there was a genotype-dependent
response of the rotifer Asplanchna girodi to toxic Anabaena flos-aquae and Lyngbya sp.
Hietala et al. (1997) observed a variation in susceptibility of more than three orders of
magnitude in the acute toxicity of Microcystis aeruginosa to 10 clones of Daphnia pulex.
Both DeMott et al. (1991) and Laurén-Määttä et al. (1997) suggested that clone and
species differences between zooplankton susceptibilities to toxic cyanobacteria may
lead to selection pressures in favour of resistant strains or species in water bodies where
toxic cyanobacteria occur frequently.
Benndorf and Henning (1989) found that the toxicity of a field population of Microcystis
was increased by the feeding activity of Daphnia galeata over a period of a few months.
A possible explanation for this phenomenon is offered by DeMott et al. (1991) who
demonstrated that a number of zooplankton species will avoid grazing on toxic
cyanobacteria, but continue to graze on non-toxic species. Similar results have also
been shown for grazing by the phytoplanktivorous fish Tilapia and silver carp. Thus,
grazing pressure from zooplankton and some fish may lead to the selective enrichment
of toxic cyanobacterial strains over time.
It is likely that under natural conditions in water bodies, certain species and strains of
zooplankton may be affected by cyanotoxins, whereas others will be unaffected. As such,
cyanotoxins may influence the zooplankton community structure, especially during times
when cyanobacteria are dominant within the phytoplankton.
3.5.3 Effects on fish
If fish are dosed with cyanotoxins by i.p. injections or by force-feeding, they develop
similar symptoms of intoxication as laboratory mammals. The question relevant for field
exposure is whether cyanotoxins enter healthy fish. For example, Tencalla et al. (1994)
showed that gastrointestinal uptake by gavage (force-feeding) caused massive hepatic
necrosis followed by fish deaths, whereas immersion of adults and juveniles in
contaminated water did not cause toxic effects. Other reported evidence suggests that
immersion in toxic cyanobacteria or cyanotoxins may be harmful to fish. Differences in
sensitivity may be pronounced between species: goldfish were found to be nearly 30
times less susceptible to i.p. microcystin than mice (Sugaya et al., 1990). Release of
toxic compounds from mass developments of cyanobacteria was considered to be the
cause of fish kills by Penaloza et al. (1990). Histopathological investigations offish
deaths during cyanobacterial blooms in the UK, indicated that the cause of death was
mostly due to damage of the gills, digestive tract and liver (Rodger et al., 1994). The gill
damage was probably caused by the high pH induced by cyanobacterial photosynthesis
activity prior to the bloom collapse, together with the higher level of ammonia arising
from the decomposition of the cyanobacteria. However, gill damage may have enhanced
microcystin uptake and thus led to liver necrosis. Damage to gills by dissolved
microcystin-LR has been shown experimentally in Tilapia and trout (Garcia, 1989; Gaete
et al., 1994; Bury et al., 1996).
Other pathological symptoms ascribed to toxic cyanobacterial blooms include damage to
the liver, heart, kidney, gills, skin and spleen (Garcia, 1989; Råbergh et al., 1991).
Garcia (1989) and Rodger et al. (1994) carried out experiments on trout, while Råbergh
et al. (1991) experimented on carp. The latter study highlighted degenerative changes in
kidney tubules and glomeruli. The effect of microcystins on European carp, Cyprinus
carpio, under natural field conditions in Australia has been described by Carbis et al.
(1997) as atrophy of hepatocytes, gills with pinpoint necrosis, epithelial ballooning,
folded lamellar tips, exfoliation of the lamellar epithelium, elevated asparate
aminotransferase activity and serum bilirubin concentrations. Laboratory studies indicate
that dissolved microcystins may affect fish embryos (Oberemm et al., 1997) and
behaviour of fish (Baganz et al., 1998).
The most definitive effect of microcystin on fish concerns Atlantic Salmon reared in net
pens in coastal waters of British Columbia and Washington State, USA. As yet
unidentified microcystin-producing organisms produce a progressive degeneration of the
liver in salmon smolts placed into open-water net pens (Anderson et al., 1993). The
disease, referred to as Net Pen Liver Disease (NPLD), has resulted in significant
economic losses for the mariculture industry.
3.6 References
Anderson, D.M. 1994 Red tides. Scientific American, August, 52-58.
Anderson, R.J., Luu, H.A., Chen, D.Z.X., Holmes, C.F.B., Kent, M., LeBlanc, M., Taylor,
F.J.R. and Williams, D.E. 1993 Chemical and biological evidence links microcystins to
salmon "Netpen liver Disease". Toxicon, 31, 1315-1323.
Annila, A., Lehtimäki, J., Manila, K., Eriksson, J.E., Sivonen, K., Rantala, T.T. and
Drakenberg, T. 1996 Solution structure of nodularin an inhibitor of serine/threonine
specific protein phosphatases. J. Bio. Chem., 271(28), 16695-16702.
Arment, A.R. and Carmichael, W.W. 1996 Evidence that microcystin is a thio-template
product. J. Phycol., 32, 591-597.
Azavedo, S.M.F.O., Evans, W.R., Carmichael, W.W. and Namikoshi, M. 1994 First
report of microcystins from a Brazilian isolate of the cyanobacterium Microcystis
aeruginosa. J. App. Phycol., 6, 261-265.
Baganz, D., Staaks, G., Steinberg, C. 1998 Impact of the cyanobacteria toxin,
microcystin-LR, on the behavior of zebrafish, Danio rerio. Wat. Res., 32, 948-952.
Baker, P.D. and Humpage, A.R. 1994 Toxicity associated with commonly occurring
cyanobacteria in surface waters of the Murray-Darling basin, Australia. Aust. J. Mar.
Freshwat. Res., 45, 773-786.
Banker, P.D., Carmeli, S., Hadas, O., Teltsch, B., Porat, R. and Sukenik, A. 1997
Identification of cylindrospermopsin in Aphanizomenon ovalisporum (Cyanophyceae)
isolated from Lake Kinneret, Israel. J. Phycol., 33, 613-616.
Barford, D. and Keller, J. 1994 Co-crystallization of the catalytic subunit of the
serine/threonine specific protein phosphatase 1 from human in complex with
microcystin-LR. J Molecular Biol., 235, 763-766.
Bateman, K. P., Thibault, P., Douglas, D. J. and White, R. L. 1995 Mass spectral
analyses of microcystins from toxic cyanobacteria using on-line chromatographic and
electrophoretic separations. J. Chromatog. A, 712, 253-268.
Beattie, K.A, Kaya, K., Sano, T. and Codd, G.A. 1998 Three dehydrobutyrine (Dhb)-
containing microcystins from the cyanobacterium Nostoc sp. Phytochemistry, 47(7),
1289-1292.
Benndorf, J. and Henning, M. 1989 Daphnia and toxic blooms of Microcystis aeruginosa
in Bautzen Reservoir. Int. Rev. ges. Hydrobiol., 74, 233-248.
Berg, K. Skulberg, O.M. and Skulberg, R. 1987 Effects of decaying toxic blue-green
algae on water quality - a laboratory study. Arch. Hydrobiol., 108, 549-563.
Berg, K., Skulberg, O.M., Skulberg, R., Underdal, B. and Willén, T. 1986 Observations of
toxic blue-green algae (Cyanobacteria) in some Scandinavian lakes. Acta. Vet. Scand.,
27, 440-452.
Blackburn, S.I., Bolch, C.J., Jones, G.J., Negri, A.P. and Orr, P.T. 1997 Cyanobacterial
blooms: why are they toxic? In: J.R.D. Davis [Ed.] Managing Algal Blooms: Outcomes
from the CSIRO Blue-Green Algal Research Program. J.R.D. Davis [Ed.] CSIRO Land
and Water, Canberra, 67-77.
Blackburn, S., McCausland, M.A., Bolch, C.J.S., Newman, S.J. and Jones, G.J. 1996
Effect of salinity on growth and toxin production in cultures of the bloom-forming
cyanobacterium Nodularia spumigena from Australian waters. Phycologia, 35, 511-522.
Boland, M.P., Smillie, M.A., Chen, D.Z.X. and Holmes, C.F.B. 1993 A unified bioscreen
for the detection of diarrhetic shellfish toxins and microcystins in marine and freshwater
environments. Toxicon, 31, 1393-1405.
Bolch, C.J.S., Blackburn, S.I., Jones, G.J., Orr, P.T. and Grewe, P.M. 1997 Plasmid
content and distribution in the toxic cyanobacterial genus Microcystis Kutzing ex
Lemmermann (Cyanobacteria: Chroococcales). Phycologia, 36, 6-11.
Botes, D.P., Tuinman, A.A., Wessels, P.L., Viljoen, C.C. and Kruger, H. 1984 The
structure of cyanoginosin-LA, a cyclic heptapeptide toxin from the cyanobacterium
Microcystis aeruginosa. J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Transactions, I, 2311-2318.
Botes, D.P., Wessels, P.L., Kruger, H., Runnegar, M.T.C., Santikarn, S., Smith, R.J.,
Barna, J.C.J. and Williams, D.H. 1985 Structural studies on cyanoginosins-LR, -YR, -YA,
and -YM, peptide toxins from Microcystis aeruginosa. J. Chem. Soc., Perkin
Transactions, I, 2747-2748.
Bourne, D., Jones, G.J. Blakeley, R.L., Jones, A., Negri, A.P. and Riddles, P. 1996
Enzymatic pathway for the bacterial degradation of the cyanobacterial cyclic peptide
toxin microcystin -LR. Appl. Env. Microbiol., 62,4086-4094.
Bruno, M., Barbini, D.A., Pierdominici, E., Serse, A.P. and Ioppolo, A. 1994 Anatoxin-a
and previously unknown toxin in Anabaena planctonica from blooms found in Lake
Mulargia (Italy). Toxicon, 32, 369-373.
Bumke-Vogt, C. 1998 Anatoxin-a and neurotoxic cyanobacteria in German lakes and
reservoirs. Env. Toxicol. Water Qual., (In Press).
Bumke-Vogt, C., Mailahn, W., Retard, W. and Chorus, I. 1996 A highly sensitive
analytical method for the neurotoxin anatoxin-a, using GC-ECD, and first application to
laboratory cultures. Phycologia, 35(6, Supplement), 51-56.
Bury, N.R., Flik, G., Eddy, F.B. and Codd, G.A 1996 The effects of cyanobacteria and
the cyanobacterial toxin microcystin-LR on Ca 2+ transport and Na+/K+ - ATPase in Tilapia
gills. J. Exp. Biol., 199,1319-1326.
Canter, H., Heaney, S.I. and Lund, J.W.G. 1990 The ecological significance of grazing
on planktonic populations of cyanobacteria by the ciliate Nassula. New Phytol., 114,
247-263.
Carbis, C.R., Rawlin, G.T., Grant, P., Mitchell, G.F., Anderson, J.W. and McCauley, I.
1997 A study of feral carp Cyprinus carpio L., exposed to Microcystis aeruginosa at Lake
Mokoan, Australia, and possible implication on fish health. J. Fish Diseases, 20, 81-91.
Carbis, C.R. Simons, J.A., Mitchell, G.F., Anderson, J.W. and McCauley, I. 1994 A
biochemical profile for predicting the chronic exposure of sheep to Microcystis
aeruginosa, an hepatotoxic species of blue-green alga. Res. Vet. Sci,. 57(3), 310-316.
Cardellina II, J.H., Marner, F.J and Moore, R.E. 1979 Seaweed dermatitis, structure of
lyngbyatoxin A. Science, 204, 193-195.
Carmichael, W.W. 1986 Algal toxins. In: J.A. Callow [Ed.] Advances in Botanical
Research, No. 12. Academic Press, London, 47-101.
Carmichael, W.W. 1992 A Status Report on Planktonic Cyanobacteria (Blue Green
Algae) and their Toxins. EPA/600/R-92/079, Environmental Monitoring Systems
Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, US Environmental Protection Agency,
Cincinnati, Ohio.
Carmichael, W.W. 1997 The Cyanotoxins. Adv. Bot. Res., 27, 211-256.
Carmichael, W.W., Beasley, V.R., Bunner, D.L., Eloff, J.N., Falconer, I., Gorham, P.,
Harada, K.I., Krishnamurthy, T., Yu, M.J., Moore, R.E., Rinehart, K., Runnegar, M.,
Skulberg, O.M. and Watanabe, M. 1988a Naming of cyclic heptapeptide toxins of
cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). Toxicon, 26, 971-973.
Carmichael, W.W., Biggs, D.F. and Gorham, P.R. 1975 Toxicology and pharmacological
action of Anabaena flos-aquae toxin. Science, 187, 542-544.
Carmichael, W.W., Eschedor, J.T, Patterson, G.M.L. and Moore R.E. 1988b Toxicity and
partial structure of a hepatotoxic peptide produced by the cyanobacterium Nodularia
spumigena Mertens. Appl. Env. Microbiol., 54, 2257-2263.
Carmichael, W.W., Evans, W.R., Yin, Q.Q., Bell, P. and Mocauklowski, E. 1997
Evidence for paralytic shellfish poisons in the freshwater cyanobacterium Lyngbya wollei
(Farlow ex Gomont) comb. nov. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 63, 3104-3110.
Carmichael, W.W. and Gorham, P.R. 1981 The mosaic nature of toxic blooms of
cyanobacteria. In: W.W. Carmichael [Ed.] The Water Environment: Algal Toxins and
Health, Plenum Press, New York, 161-172.
Carmichael, W.W., Mahmood, N.A. and Hyde, E.G. 1990 Natural toxins from
cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). In: S. Hall and G. Strichartz [Eds] Marine Toxins,
Origin, Structure and Molecular Pharmacology, Vol. 418, American Chemical Society,
Washington D.C., 87-106.
Carmichael, W.W., Yu, M. J., He, Z.R, He, J.W. and Yu, J-L. 1988c Occurrence of the
toxic cyanobacterium (blue-green alga) Microcystis aeruginosa in Central China. Arch.
Hydrobiol., 114, 21-30.
Chiswell, R.K., Shaw, G.R., Eaglesham, G.K., Smith, M.J., Norris, R.L., Seawright, A.A.
and Moore, M.R. 1999 Stability of cylindrospermopsin, the toxin from the
cyanobacterium Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii. Effects of pH, temperature and sunlight
on decomposition. Environ. Toxicol. Water Qual. (In Press).
Choi, B.W., Namikoshi, M., Sun, F., Rinehart, K.L., Carmichael, W.W., Kaup, A.M.,
Evans, W.R. and Beasley, V.R. 1993 Isolation of linear peptides related to the
hepatotoxins nodularin and microcystins. Tetrahedron Letters, 34, 7881-7884.
Chorus, I. 1998 Die Blaualgen ("Cyanobakterien") - eine Berliner Besonderheit welcher
Zusammenhang besteht zwischen dem Massenhaften Auftreten von Blaualgen und der
Nutzung von Badegewässern? In: Nachhaltigkeit im Wasserwesen in der Mitte Europas.
Symposium 17-19 June, 1998, Berlin (In Press).
Christoffersen, K. 1996 Ecological implications of cyanobacterial toxins in aquatic food
webs. Phycologia, 35(6 Supplement), 42-50.
Codd, G.A. and Bell, S.G. 1996 The Occurrence and Fate of Blue-green Algae in Fresh-
waters. National Rivers Authority Research and Development Report 29, Her Majesty's
Stationery Office, London, 30 pp.
Codd, G.A. and Poon, G.K. 1988 Cyanobacterial toxins. In: J. G. Gallon, and L. J.
Rogers [Eds] Proc. Phytochem. Soc. Europe, 28, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 283-
296.
Codd, G.A., Edwards, C., Beattie, K.A., Lawton, L.A., Campell, D.L. and Bell, S.G. 1995
Toxins from blue-green algae. The Pringsheim Lecture. In: W. Wiessner, E. Schnepf and
R. C. Starr [Eds] Algae, Environment and Human Affairs. Biopress, Bristol, 1-17.
Costa, M.S. and Azevedo, S.M.F.O. 1994 Implantacao de um banco de culturas de
cianoficeas toxicas. Iheringia, 45, 69-74 (in Portuguese).
Cousins, I.T., Healing, D.J., James, H.A., Sutton, A. 1996 Biodegradation of microcystin-
LR by indigenous mixed bacterial populations. Wat. Res., 30, 481-485.
Craig, M., McCready, L., Luu, H.A., Smillie, M.A., Dubord, P. and Holmes, C.F.B. 1993
Identification and characterization of hydrophobic microcystins in Canadian freshwater
cyanobacteria. Toxicon, 31, 1541-1549.
Cremer, J. and Henning, K. 1991 Application of reversed-phase medium-pressure liquid
chromatography to the isolation, separation and amino acid analysis of two closely
related peptide toxins of the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa strain PCC 7806. J.
Chromatog., 587, 71-80.
Davidson, F.F. 1959 Poisoning of wild and domestic animals by a toxic waterbloom of
Nostoc rivulare Kuetz. J. Am. Water Works Ass., 51,1277-1287.
DeMott, W.R. Zhang, Q. Carmichael, W.W. 1991 Effects of toxic cyanobacteria and
purified toxins on the survival and feeding of a copepod and three species of Daphnia.
Limnol. Oceanog., 36(7), 1346-1357.
de Silva, E.D., Williams, D.E., Andersen, R.J., Klix, H., Holmes, C.F.B. and Alien, T.M.
1992 Motuporin, a potent protein phosphatase inhibitor isolated from the Papua New
Guinea sponge Theonella swinhoei Gray. Tetrahedron Letters, 33, 1561-1564.
Devlin, J.P., Edwards, O.E., Gorham, P.R., Hunter, M.R., Pike, R.K. and Stavric, B. 1977
Anatoxin-a, a toxic alkaloid from Anabaena flos-aquae NCR-44h. Cana. J. of Chem., 55,
1367-1371.
Dittman, E., Neilan, B.A., Erhard, M., v. Döhren, H. and Börner, T. 1997 Insertional
mutagenesis of a peptide synthetase gene which is responsible for hepatotoxin
production in the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa PCC 7806. Mol. Microbiol., 26,
779-787.
Edwards, C., Beattie, K.A., Scrimgeour, C.M. and Codd, G.A. 1992 Identification of
anatoxin-a in benthic cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) and in associated dog poisonings
at Loch Insh, Scotland. Toxicon, 30, 1165-1175.
Ekman-Ekebom, M., Kauppi, M., Sivonen, K., Niemi, M. and Lepistö, L. 1992 Toxic
cyanobacteria in some Finnish lakes. Environ. Toxicol. Water Qual., 7, 201-213.
Elleman, T.C., Falconer, I.R., Jackson, A.R.B., and Runnegar, M.T. 1978 Isolation,
characterization and pathology of the toxin from a Microcystis aeruginosa (=Anacystis
cyanea) bloom. Aust. J. Biol. Sci., 31, 209-218.
Endean, R., Monks, S.A., Griffith, J.K. and Llewellyn, L.E. 1993 Apparent relationship
between toxins elaborated by the cyanobacterium Trichodesmium erythraeum and those
present in the flesh of the narrow-barred Spanish mackerel Scomberomorus
commersoni. Toxicon, 31, 1155-1165.
Entzeroth, M., Blackman, A.J., Mynderse, J.S. and Moore, R.E. 1985 Structures and
stereochemistries of oscillatoxin B, 31-noroscillatoxin B, oscillatoxin D, and 30-
methyloscillatoxin D. J. Organic Chem., 50, 1255-1259.
Eriksson, J.E., Meriluoto, J.A., Lindholm, T. 1989 Accumulation of peptide toxin from the
cyanobacterium Oscillatoria agardhii in the freshwater mussel Anadonta cygnea.
Hydrobiologia, 183, 211-216.
Falconer, I.R., Choice, A. and Hosja, W. 1992 Toxicity of the edible mussel (Mytilus
edulis) growing naturally in an estuary during a water-bloom of the blue-green alga
Nodularia spumigena J. Environ. Toxicol. Water Qual., 7,119-123.
Fastner, J. 1994 First evidence on the occurrence of microcystin-LR in Berlin and
Brandenburg lakes. In: G. A. Codd, T. M. Jefferies, C. W. Keevil and E. Potter [Eds]
Detection Methods for Cyanobacterial Toxins. The Royal Society of Chemistry,
Cambridge, 149-151.
Fastner, J. 1998 Microcystins in German fresh-water bodies. Environ. Toxicol. Water
Qual., (In Press).
Fastner, J., Neumann, U. and Erhard, M. 1998 Patterns of different microcystins in field
samples dominated by different species of cyanobacteria. In: I. Chorus, [Ed.]
Cyanotoxins - Occurrence, Effects, Controlling Factors. Springer Verlag, (In Press).
Foxall, T.L. and Sasner J.J. 1988 Effect of a hepatic toxin from the cyanophyte
Microcystis aeruginosa. In: W.W. Carmichael [Ed.] The Water Environment. Algal Toxins
and Health. Plenum Press, New York.
Francis, G. 1878 Poisonous Australian lake. Nature, 18, 11-12.
Fujiki, H., Suganuma, M., Suguri, H., Yoshizawa, S., Takagi, K., Nakayasu, M., Ojika, M.,
Yamada, K., Yasumoto, T., Moore, R.E. and Sugimura, T. 1990 New tumor promoters
from marine natural products. In: S. Hall and G. Strichartz [Eds] Marine Toxins, Origin,
Structure and Molecular Pharmacology, Vol. 418, American Chemical Society,
Washington D.C., 232-240.
Fulton, R.S. 1988 Resistence to blue-green algal toxin by Bosmina longirostris. J.
Plankton Res., 10(4), 771-778.
Gaete, V., Canelo, E., Lagos, N., and Zambrano, F. 1994 Inhibitory effects of Microcystis
aeruginosa toxin on ion pumps of the gill of freshwater fish. Toxicon., 82, 121-127.
Gallon, J.R., Chit, K.N. and Brown, E.G. 1990 Biosynthesis of the tropane-related
cyanobacterial toxin anatoxin-a: role of ornithine decarboxylase. Phytochemistry, 29,
1107-1 111.
Gallon J.R., Kittakoop, O. and Brown, E.G. 1994 Biosynthesis of anatoxin-a by
Anabaena flos-aquae: examination of primary enzymic steps. Phytochemistry, 35, 1195-
1203.
Garcia, G.O. 1989 Toxicity of the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa strain 7820 to
trout and tilapia: a clinical and histopathological study. MSc Thesis, University of Stirling,
UK.
Gathercole, P.S. and Thiel, P.G. 1987 Liquid chromatographic determination of the
cyanoginosins, toxins produced by the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa. J.
Chromatog., 408, 435-440.
Gentile, J.H. and Maloney, T.E. 1969 Toxicity and environmental requirements of a
strain of Aphanizomenon flos-aquae (L.) Ralfs. Can. J. Microbiol., 15,165-173.
Goldberg, J., Huang, H.B., Kwon, Y.G., Greengard, P., Nairn, A.C. and Kuriyan, J. 1995
Three-dimensional structure of the catalytic subunit of protein serine/threonine
phosphatase-1. Nature, 376, 745-753.
Gorham, P.R. 1962 Laboratory studies on the toxins produced by waterblooms of blue-
green algae. Am. J. Public Health, 52, 2100-2105.
Hahn, S.T. and Capra, M.F. 1992 The cyanobacterium Oscillatoria erythraea a potential
source of toxin in the ciguatera food-chain. Food Additives and Contaminants, 9, 351-
355.
Hammer, U.T. 1968 Toxic blue-green algae in Saskatchewan. Can. Vet. J., 9, 221-229.
Harada, K-I., Matsuura, K., Suzuki, M., Watanabe, M.F., Oishi, S., Dahlem, A.M.,
Beasley, V.R. and Carmichael, W.W. 1990b Isolation and characterization of the minor
components associated with microcystins-LR and -RR in the cyanobacterium (blue-
green algae). Toxicon, 28, 55-64.
Harada, K.I., Nagai, H., Kimura, Y., Suzuki, M., Park, H.D., Watanabe, M.F., Luukkainen,
R., Sivonen, K. and Carmichael, W.W. 1993 Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometric
detection of anatoxin-a, a neurotoxin from cyanobacteria. Tetrahedron, 49, 9251-9260.
Harada, K.I., Ogawa, K., Kimura, Y., Murata, H., Suzuki, M., Thorn, P.M., Evans, W.R.
and Carmichael, W.W. 199 la Microcystins from Anabaena flos-aquae NRC 525-17.
Chem. Res. Toxicol., 4, 535-540.
Harada, K.I., Ogawa, K., Matsuura, K., Murata, H., Suzuki, M., Watanabe, M.F., Itezono,
Y. and Nakayama, N. 1990a Structural determination of geometrical isomers of
microcystins-LR and -RR from cyanobacteria by two-dimensional NMR spectroscopic
techniques. Chemical Research in Toxicology. 3, 473-481.
Harada, K.-I., Ogawa, K., Matsuura, K., Nagai, H., Murata, H., Suzuki, M., Itezono, Y.,
Nakayma, N., Shirai, M. and Nakano, M. 1991b Isolation of two toxic heptapeptide
microcystins from an axenic strain of Microcystis aeruginosa, K-139. Toxicon, 29, 479-
489.
Harada, K.I., Ohtani, I., Iwamoto, K., Suzuki, M., Watanabe, M.F., Watanabe, M. and
Terao, K. 1994 Isolation of cylindrospermopsin from a cyanobacterium Umezakia natans
and its screening method. Toxicon, 32, 73-84.
Harada, K-I., Tsuji, K, Watanabe, M.F. 1996 Stability of microcystins from cyanobacteria
- III. Effect of pH and temperature. Phycologia, 35(6 Supplement), 83-88.
Hashimoto, Y., Kamiya, H., Yamazato, K. and Nozawa, K. 1976 Occurrence of a toxic
blue-green alga inducing skin dermatitis in Okinawa. In: A. Ohsaka, K. Hayashi and Y.
Sawai [Eds] Animal, Plant, and Microbial Toxins. Vol. 1, Plenum Publishing, New York,
333-338.
Hawkins, P. and Lampert, W. 1989 The effect of Daphnia body size on filtering rate
inhibition in the presence of a filamentous cyanobacterium. Limnol. Oceanog., 34(6),
1084-1089.
Hawkins, P.R., Chandrasena, N.R., Jones, G.J., Humpage, A.R. and Falconer, I.R. 1997
Isolation and toxicity of Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii from an ornamental lake. Toxicon,
35(3), 341-346.
Hawkins, P.R., Runnegar, M.T.C., Jackson, A.R.B. and Falconer, I.R. 1985 Severe
hepatotoxicity caused by the tropical cyanobacterium (blue-green alga)
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Woloszynska) Seenaya and Subba Raju isolated from a
domestic water supply reservoir. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 50, 1292-1295.
Hawser, S.P., Codd, G.A., Carpenter, E.J. and Capone, D.G. 1991 A neurotoxic factor
associated with the bloom-forming cyanobacterium Trichodesmium. Toxicon, 29, 277-
278.
Hemscheidt, T., Burgoyne, D.L. and Moore, R.E. 1995a Biosynthesis of anatoxin-.
(2S,4S)-4-hydroxyarginine as an intermediate. J. Chem. Soc., Chemical
Communications, 205-206.
Hemscheidt T., Rapala, J., Sivonen, K. and Skulberg, O.M. 1995b Biosynthesis of
anatoxin-a in Anabaena flos-aquae and homoanatoxin-a in Oscillatoria formosa. J.
Chem. Soc., Chemical Communications, 1361-1362.
Henning, M. and Kohl, J.G. 1981 Toxic blue-green algae water blooms found in some
lakes in the German Democratic Republic. Int. Rev. ges. Hydrobiol., 66, 553-561.
Henriksen, P. 1996a Microcystin profiles and contents in Danish populations of
cyanobacteria/blue-green algae as determined by HPLC, Phycologia, (Supplement),
35(6), 102-110.
Henriksen, P. 1996b Toxic cyanobacteria/blue-green algae in Danish fresh waters.
Thesis, Dept. of Phycology, University of Copenhagen.
Henriksen, P., Carmichael, W.W., An, J. and Moestrup, Ø. 1997 Detection of an
anatoxin-a(s)-like anticholinesterase in natural blooms and cultures of
cyanobacteria/blue-green algae from Danish lakes and in the stomach contents of
poisoned birds. Toxicon, 35, 901-913.
Henriksen, P., Kaas, H., Damsø, L. and Moestrup, Ø. 1995 Toxic cyanobacteria (blue-
green algae) in Danish fresh waters. Poster presented in 1st International Congress on
Toxic Cyanobacteria (Blue-green Algae), August, Rnne, Denmark, 20-24.
Henriksen, P., Sivonen, K., Kaas, H. and Moestrup, Ø. 1998 Toxic cyanobacteria/blue-
green algae in Danish fresh waters. J. Phycol. (In Press).
Hietala, J., Laurén-Määttä, C. and Walls, M. 1997 Sensitivity of Daphnia to toxic
cyanobacteria: effects of genotype and temperature. Freshwat. Biol., 37, 299-306.
Humpage, A.R., Rositano, J., Bretag, A.H., Brown, R., Baler, P.D., Nicholson, B.C. and
Steffensen, D.A. 1994. Paralytic shellfish poisons from Australian cyanobacterial blooms.
Aust. J. Mar. Freshwater Res., 45(5), 761-771.
Ikawa, M., Wegener, K., Foxall, T.L. and Sasner, J.J. 1982 Comparison of the toxins of
the blue-green alga Aphanizomenon flos-aquae with the Gonyaulax toxins. Toxicon. 20,
747-752.
Jackim, E. and Gentile, J. 1968 Toxins of a blue-green alga, similarity to saxitoxin.
Science, 162, 915-916.
Jacobs, D., Bass, R.A. and Neilan, B.A. 1995 Isolation and characterization of candidate
genes responsible for toxins biosynthesis in cyanobacteria. Abstract, Presented at the
Vth Cyanobacterial Molecular Biology Workshop, July, 1995, Asilomar, CA, USA, 98, 21-
25.
James, K.J., Sherlock, I.R. and Stack, M.A. 1997 Anatoxin-a in Irish freshwater and
cyanobacteria, determined using a new fluorimetric liquid chromatographic method.
Toxicon, 35(6), 963-971.
Jones, G.J. and Falconer, I.R. 1994 Factors affecting the production of toxins by
cyanobacteria. Final Grant Report to the Land and Water Resources Research and
Development Corporation, Canberra, Australia.
Jones, G.J. and Negri, A.P. 1997 Persistence and degradation of cyanobacterial
paralytic shellfish poisons (PSPs) in freshwaters. Wat. Res., 31, 525-533.
Jones, G.J. and Orr, P.T. 1994 Release and degradation of microcystin following
algicide treatment of a Microcystis aeruginosa bloom in a recreational lake, as
determined by HPLC and protein phosphatase inhibition assay. Wat. Res., 28, 871-876.
Jones, G.J., Blackburn, S.I. and Parker, N.S. 1994 A toxic bloom of Nodularia
spumigena Mertens in Orielton Lagoon, Tasmania. Australian J. Mar. Freshwat. Res., 45,
787-800. 1783
Jones, G.J., Falconer, I.F. and Wilkins, R.M. 1995 Persistence of cyclic peptide toxins in
dried cyanobacterial crusts from Lake Mokoan, Australia. Environ. Toxicol. Water Qual.,
10, 19-24.
Jungmann, D. 1992 Toxic compounds isolated from Microcystis PCC 7806 that are more
active against Daphnia than two microcystins. Limnol. Oceanog., 37, 1777-1783.
Jungmann, D. and Benndorf, J. 1994 Toxicity to Daphnia of a compound extracted from
laboratory and natural Microcystis spp., and the role of microcystins. Freshwat. Biol., 32,
13-20.
Kaya, K. and Watanabe, M.M. 1990 Microcystin composition of an axenic clonal strain of
Microcystis viridis and Microcystis viridis - containing waterblooms in Japanese
freshwaters. J. App. Phycol., 2, 173-178.
Keleti, G. and Sykora, J.L. 1982 Production and properties of cyanobacterial endotoxins.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 43, 104 - 109.
Kenefick, S.L., Hrudey, S.E., Peterson, H.G. and Prepas, E.E. 1992 Toxin release from
Microcystis aeruginosa after chemical treatment. Wat. Sci. Tech., 27, 433-440.
Kerr, T., Jones, G.J. and Negri, A. 1995 Hydroxy fatty acid analysis of
lipopolysaccharides in cyanobacteria. CSIRO Division of Water Resources, Australia,
Summer Studentship report, 73 pp.
Kiviranta, J., Sivonen, K., Luukkainen, R., Lahti K. and Niemelä, S. I. 1991 Production
and biodegradation of cyanobacterial toxins; a laboratory study, Arch. Hydrobiol., 121,
281-294.
Kononen, K., Sivonen, K. and Lehtimäki, J. 1993 Toxicity of phytoplankton blooms in the
Gulf of Finland and Gulf of Bothnia, Baltic Sea. In: T. J. Smayda and Y. Shimizu [Eds]
Toxic Phytoplankton Blooms in the Sea, Elsevier Scientific Publications, Amsterdam,
269-274.
Kotak, B.G., Kenefick, S.L., Fritz, D.L., Rousseaux, C.G., Prepas, E.E. and Hrudey, S.E.
1993 Occurrence and toxicological evaluation of cyanobacterial toxins in Alberta lakes
and farm dugouts. Wat. Res., 27, 5-506.
Kotak, B.G., Lam, A.K.Y., Prepas, E.E., Kenefick, S.L. and Hrudey, S.E. 1995 Variability
of the hepatotoxin microcystin-LR in hypereutrophic drinking water lakes. J. Phycol., 31,
248-263.
Krishnamyrthy, T., Szafraniec, L., Hunt, D.F., Shabanowitz, J., Yates, J.R., Hauer, C.R.,
Carmichael, W.W., Skulberg, O., Codd, G.A. and Missler, S. 1989 Structural
characterization of toxic cyclic peptides from blue-green algae by tandem mass
spectrometry. Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences USA., 86, 770-774.
Kusumi, T., Ooi, T., Watanabe, M.M., Takahashi, H. and Kakisawa, H. 1987
Cyanoviridin RR, a toxin from the cyanobacterium (blue-green alga) Microcystis viridis.
Tetrahedron Letters, 28, 4695-4698.
Lagos, N., Liberona, J.L., Andrinolo, D., Zagatto, P.A., Soares, R.M. and Azevedo,
S.M.F.Q. 1997 First evidence of paralytic shellfish toxins in the freshwater
cyanobacterium Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii isolated from Brazil. Abstract, VIII
International Conference on Harmful Algae, June 25-29, 1997, Vigo, Spain, 115.
Lahti, K., Kilponen, J., Kivimäki, A.L., Erkomaa, K. and Sivonen, K. 1996 Removal of
cyanobacteria and their hepatotoxins from raw water in soil and sediment columns. In:
A.L. Kivimäki and T. Suokko [Eds] Artificial Recharge of Groundwater. NHP Report No.
38, Helsinki, 187-195.
Lahti, K., Niemi, M. R., Rapala J. and Sivonen, K. 1997a Biodegradation of
cyanobacterial hepatotoxins - characterization of toxin degrading bacteria. Proceedings
of the VII International Conference on Harmful Algae.
Lahti, K., Rapala, J., Färdig, M., Niemelä, M. and Sivonen, K. 1997b Persistence of
cyanobacterial hepatotoxin, microcystin-LR, in particulate material and dissolved in lake
water. Wat. Res., 31(5), 1005-1012.
Lam, A.K.-Y., Fedorak, P.M. and Prepas, E.E. 1995 Biotransformation of the
cyanobacterial hepatotoxin microcystin-LR, as determined by HPLC and protein
phosphatase bioassay. Environ. Sci. Technol., 29(1), 242-246.
Lampert, W. 1981 Inhibitory and toxic effect of blue-green algae on Daphnia. Rev. Ges.
Hydrobiol., 66, 285-298.
Lanaras, T. and Cook, C.M. 1994 Toxin extraction from an Anabaenopsis milleri -
dominated bloom. Sci. Total Environ., 142, 163-169.
Lanaras, T., Tsitsamis, S., Chlichlia, C. and Cook, C.M. 1989 Toxic cyanobacteria in
Greek freshwaters. J. Applied Phycol., 1, 67-73.
Laurén-Määttä, C., Hietala, J. and Walls, M. 1997 Responses of Daphnia pulex
populations to toxic cyanobacteria. Freshwat. Biol., 37, 635-647.
Lawton, L.A., Beattie, K.A., Hawser, S.P., Campbell, D.L. and Codd, G.A. 1994
Evaluation of assay methods for the determination of cyanobacterial hepatotoxicity. In:
G.A Codd, T.M. Jeffries, C.W. Keevil, E. Potter [Eds] Detection Methods for
Cyanobacterial Toxins. Proceedings of the First International Symposium on Detection
Methods for Cyanobacterial Toxins, September 1993 The Royal Society of Chemistry,
Cambridge, 111-116.
Leeuwangh, P., Kappers, F.I., Dekker, M. and Koerselman, W. 1983 Toxicity of
cyanobacteria in Dutch lakes and reservoirs. Aquat. Toxicol., 4, 63-72.
Lehtimäki, J., Moisander, P., Sivonen, K. and Kononen, K. 1997 Growth, nitrogen
fixation, and nodularin production by two Baltic Sea cyanobacteria. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol., 63, 1647-1656.
Lehtimäki, J., Sivonen, K., Luukkainen, R. and Niemelä, S.I. 1994 The effects of
incubation time, temperature, light, salinity, and phosphorus on growth and hepatotoxin
production by Nodularia strains. Arch Hydrobiol., 130, 269-282.
Lindholm, T. and Meriluoto, J.A.O. 1991 Recurrent depth maxima of the hepatotoxic
cyanobacterium Oscillatoria agardhii. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 48, 1629-1634.
Lukac, M. and Aegerter, R. 1993 Influence of trace metals on growth and toxin
production of Microcystis aeruginosa. Toxicon, 31, 293-305.
Luukkainen, R., Namikoshi, M., Sivonen, K., Rinehart, K.L. and Niemelä, S.I. 1994
Isolation and identification of 12 microcystins from four strains and two bloom samples of
Microcystis spp.: structure of a new hepatotoxin. Toxicon., 32, 133-139.
Luukkainen R., Sivonen, K., Namikoshi, M., Färdig, M., Rinehart, K.L. and Niemelä, S.I.
1993 Isolation and identification of eight microcystins from 13 Oscillatoria agardhii
strains: structure of a new microcystin. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 59, 2204-2209.
Lyck, S., Gjølme, N. and Utkilen, H. 1996 Irom-starvation increases toxicity of
Microcystis aeruginosa CYA 22/1 (Chroococcales, Cyanophyceae). Phycologia, 35(6
Supplement), 120-124.
Mahmood, N.A. and Carmichael, W.W. 1986 Paralytic shellfish poisons produced by the
freshwater cyanobacterium Aphanizomenon flos-aquae NH-5. Toxicon, 24, 175-186.
Mahmood, N.A. and Carmichael, W.W. 1987 Anatoxin-a(S), an anticholinesterase from
the cyanobacterium Anabaena flos-aquae NCR-525-17. Toxicon, 25, 1221-1227.
Maršálek, B., LeDu, A., Turánek, J. and Machala, M. 1995 The selection of bioassays for
cyanotoxin detection. In: Proceedings 1st International Congress on Toxic
Cyanobacteria, 20-24 August 1995, Rønne, Denmark, 45.
Maršálek, B., Turánek J. and Hindák F. 1996 Toxic cyanobacteria in Czech and Slovak
republic. In: Proceedings 1st. European Phycological Congress, Cologne, August 11-18,
1996, Eur. J. Phycol. Suppl., 42.
Matsunaga, S., Moore, R.E., Niemczura, W.P. and Carmichael, W.W. 1989 Anatoxin-
a(s), a potent anticholinesterase from Anabaena flos-aquae. J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 111,
8021-8023.
Mattson, R. and Willén, T. 1986 Toxinbildande blågröna alger i svenska insjöar 1985
(Toxin producing blue-green algae in Swedish lakes in 1985). Naturvårdsverket rapport
3096 (2)/1986. Laboratoriet för miljökontroll, Uppsala, ISSN 0282-7298.26. pp. (In
Swedish, English summary).
Matveev, V., Matveeva, L., and Jones, G.J. 1994a Study of the ability of Daphnia
carinata King to control phytoplankton and resist cyanobacterial toxicity: implications for
biomanipulation in Australia. Aust. J. Mar. Freshwat. Res., 45, 889-904.
Matveev, V., Matveeva, L. and Jones, G.J. 1994b Phytoplankton stimulation by mosquito
fish in the presence of large Daphnia. Ver. Verein. fur Theor. Ang. Limnol., 25, 2193-
2197.
McDermott, C.M., Feola, R. and Plude, J. 1995 Detection of cyanobacterial toxins
(microcystins) in waters of northeastern Wisconsin by a new immunoassay technique.
Toxicon., 33, 1433-1442.
Meissner, K., Dittman, E. and Börner, T. 1996 Toxic and non-toxic strains of the
cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa contain sequences homologous to peptide
synthetase genes. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 135, 295-303.
Meriluoto, J.A.O., Sandström, A., Eriksson, J.E., Remaud, G., Grey Craig, A. and
Chattopadhyaya, J. 1989 Structure and toxicity of a peptide hepatotoxin from the
cyanobacterium Oscillatoria agardhii. Toxicon, 27, 1021-1034.
Mez, K., Hanselmann, K., Naegeli, H. and Preisig, H.R. 1996 Protein phosphatase-
inhibiting activity in cyanobacteria from alpine lakes in Switzerland. Phycologia, 35(6
Supplement), 133-139.
Moikeha, S.N. and Chu, G.W. 1971 Dermatitis-producing alga Lyngbya majuscula
Gomont in Hawaii. II. Biological properties of the toxic factor. J. Phycol., 7, 8-13.
Moore B.S., Ohtani, I., de Koning, C.B., Moore, R.E. and Carmichael, W.W. 1992
Biosynthesis of Anatoxin-a(s). Origin of the carbons. Tetrahedron Letters. 33, 6595-6598.
Moore, R.E., Corbett, T., Patterson, G.M.L. and Valeriote, F.A. 1996 The search for new
antitumor drugs from blue-green algae. Current Pharm. Design, 2, 317-330.
Moore, R.E., Lu Chen, J., Moore, B.S. and Patterson, G.M.L. 1991 Biosynthesis of
microcystin-LR. Origin of the carbons in the Adda and Masp units. J. Amer. Chem. Soc.,
113, 5083-5084.
Moore, R.E., Ohtani, I., Moore, B.S., de Koning, C.B., Yoshida, W.Y., Runnegar, M.T.
and Carmichael, W.W. 1993 Cyanobacterial toxins. Gazzetta Chimica Italiana, 123, 329-
336.
Mynderse, J.S., Moore, R.E., Kashiwagi, M. and Norton, T.R. 1977 Antileukemia activity
in the Oscillatoriaceae, isolation of debromoaplysiatoxin from Lyngbya. Science, 196,
538-540.
Nagata, S., Tsutsumi, T., Hasegawa, A., Yoshida, F., Ueno, Y. and Watanabe, M.F.
1997 Enzyme immunoassay for direct determination of microcystins in environmental
water. J. AOAC Int., 80, 408-417.
Namikoshi, M., and Rinehart, K.L. 1996 Bioactive compounds produced by
cyanobacteria. J. Ind. Microbiol., 17, 373-384.
Namikoshi, M., Choi, B.W., Sakai, R., Sun, F., Rinehart, K.L., Carmichael, W.W., Evans,
W.R., Cruz, P., Munro, M.H.G. and Blunt, J.W. 1994 New nodularins, A general method
for structure assignment. J. Org. Chem., 59, 2349-2357.
Namikoshi, M., Rinehart, K.L., Sakai, R., Sivonen, K. and Carmichael, W.W. 1990
Structures of three new cyclic hepatotoxins produced by the cyanobacterium (blue-green
alga) Nostoc sp. strain 152. J. Org. Chem., 55, 6135-6139.
Namikoshi, M., Rinehart, K.L., Sakai, R., Stotts, R.R., Dahlem, A.M., Beasley, V.R.,
Carmichael, W.W. and Evans, W.R. 1992 Identification of 12 hepatotoxins from a Homer
lake bloom of the cyanobacteria Microcystis aeruginosa, Microcystis viridis, Microcystis
wesenbergii; nine new microcystins. J. Org. Chem., 57, 866-872.
Namikoshi, M., Sivonen, K., Evans, W.R., Carmichael, W.W., Rouhiainen, L.,
Luukkainen, R. and Rinehart, K.L. 1992b Structures of three new homotyrosine-
containing microcystins and a new homophenylalanine variant from Anabaena sp. strain
66. Chem. Res. Toxicol., 5, 661-666.
Namikoshi, M., Sivonen, K., Evans, W.R., Carmichael, W.W., Sun, F., Rouhiainen, L.,
Luukkainen, R. and Rinehart, K.L. 1992c Two new L-serine variants of microcystins-LR
and -RR from Anabaena sp. strain 202 A1 and 202 A2. Toxicon, 30, 1457-1464.
Namikoshi, M., Sivonen, K., Evans, W.R., Sun, F., Carmichael, W.W. and Rinehart, K.L.
1992d Isolation and structures of microcystins from a cyanobacterial water bloom
(Finland). Toxicon, 30, 1473-1479.
Namikoshi, M., Sun, F., Choi, B.W., Rinehart, K.L., Carmichael, W.W., Evans, W.R. and
Beasley, V.R. 1995 Seven more microcystins from Homer lake cells: application of the
general method for structure assignment of peptides containing,-dehydroamino acid
unit(s). J. Org. Chem., 60, 3671-3679.
Namikoshi, M., Yuan, M., Sivonen, K., Carmichael, W.W., Rinehart, K.L., Rouhiainen, L.,
Sun, F., Brittain, S. and Otsuki, A. 1998 Seven new microcystins possessing two L-
glutamic acit units, isolated from Anabaena sp. strain 186. Chem. Res. Toxicol., 11, 143-
149.
Negri, A.P. and Jones, G.J. 1995 Bioaccumulation of paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP)
toxins from the cyanobacterium Anabaena circinalis by the freshwater mussel Alathyria
condola. Toxicon, 33(5), 667-678.
Negri, A.P., Jones, G.J., Blackburn, S.I., Oshima, Y. and Onodera, H. 1997 Effect of
culture and bloom development and of sample storage on paralytic shellfish poisons in
the cyanobacterium Anabaena circinalis. J. Phycol., 33, 26-35.
Negri, A.P., Jones, G.J. and Hindmarsh, M. 1995 Sheep mortality associated with
Paralytic Shellfish poisoning toxins from the cyanobacterium Anabaena circinalis.
Toxicon, 33, 1321-1329.
Oberemm, A., Fastner, J. and Steinberg, C. 1997 Effects of microcystin-LR and
cyanobacterial crude extracts on embryo-larval development of zebrafish (Danio rerio).
Wat. Res., 31(11), 2918-2921.
Ohtani, I., Moore, R.E. and Runnegar, M.T.C. 1992 Cylindrospermopsin, a potent
hepatotoxin from the blue-green alga Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii. J. Amer. Chem.
Soc., 114, 7941-7942.
Olson, T.A. 1960. Water poisoning - a study of poisonous algae blooms in Minnesota.
Amer. J. Public Health, 50, 883-884.
Onodera, H., Oshima, Y., Henriksen, P. and Yasumoto, T. 1997a Confirmation of
anatoxin-a(s) in the cyanobacterium Anabaena lemmermannii as the cause of bird kills
in Danish lakes. Toxicon, 35, 1645-1648.
Onodera, H., Satake, M., Oshima, Y., Yasumoto, T. and Carmichael, W.W. 1997b New
saxitoxin analogues from the freshwater filamentous cyanobacterium Lyngbya wollei.
Natural Toxins (In Press).
Orr, P.T. and Jones, G.J. 1998 Relationship between microcystin production and cell
division rates in nitrogen-limited Microcystis aeruginosa cultures. Limnol. Oceanogr.,
43(8), (In Press).
Padisák, J. 1997 Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Woloszynska) Seenayya et Subba
Raju, an expanding, highly adaptive cyanobacterium: worldwide distribution and review
of its ecology. Arch. Hydrobiol., Suppl., 107, 563-593.
Painuly, P., Perez, R., Fukai, T. and Shimizu, Y. 1988 The structure of a cyclic peptide
toxin, cyanogenosin-RR from Microcystis aeruginosa. Tetrahedron Letters, 29, 11-14.
Park, H.-D., Watanabe, M.F., Harada, K.-I., Nagai, H., Suzuki, M., Watanabe, M. and
Hayashi, H. 1993a Hepatotoxin (microcystin) and neurotoxin (anatoxin-a) contained in
natural blooms and strains of cyanobacteria from Japanese freshwaters. Natural Toxins,
1, 353-360.
Park, H.-D., Watanabe, M.F., Harada, K.-I., Suzuki, M., Hayashi, H. and Okino, T. 1993b
Seasonal variations of Microcystis species and toxic heptapeptide microcystins in Lake
Suwa. Environ. Toxicol. Water Qual., 8, 425-435.
Penaloza, R., Rojas, M., Vila, I. and Zambrano, F. 1990 Toxicity of a soluble peptide
from Microcystis sp. to zooplankton and fish. Freshwat. Biol., 24(2), 223-240.
Prepas, E.E., Kotak, E.G., Campbell, L.M., Evans, J.C., Hrudey, S.E. and Holmes, C.F.B.
1997 Accumulation and elimination of cyanobacterial hepatotoxins by the freshwater
clam Anodonta grandis simpsoniana. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 54, 41-46.
Prinsep, M.R., Caplan, F.R., Moore, R.E., Patterson, G.M.L., Honkanen, R.E. and
Boynton, A.L. 1992 Microcystin-LR from a blue-green alga belonging to the
Stignonematales. Phytochemistry, 31, 1247-1248.
Råbergh, C.M.I., Bylund, G., Eriksson, J.E. 1991 Histopathological effect of microcystin
LR a cyclic polypeptide from the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa on common
carp (Cyprinus carpio L.). Aquat. Tox., 20,131-146.
Rapala, J. and Sivonen, K. 1998 Assessment of environmental conditions that favour
hepatotoxic and neurotoxic Anabaena spp. strains in cultured under light-limitation at
different temperatures. Microbial. Ecol., 36, 181-192.
Rapala, J., Lahti, K., Sivonen, K. and Niemelä, S. I. 1994. Biodegradability and
adsorption on lake sediments of cyanobacterial hepatotoxins and anatoxin-a. Letters in
Applied Microbiol., 19, 423-428.
Rapala, J., Sivonen, K., Luukkainen, R. and Niemelä, S.I. 1993 Anatoxin-a concentration
in Anabaena and Aphanizomenon at different environmental conditions and comparison
of growth by toxic and non-toxic Anabaena strains, a laboratory study, J. App. Phycol., 5,
581-591.
Rapala, J., Sivonen, K., Lyra, C. and Niemelä, S.I. 1997 Variation of microcystins,
cyanobacterial hepatotoxins, in Anabaena spp. as a function of growth stimuli. App.
Environ. Microbiol., 64, 2206-2212.
Raziuddin, S., Siegelman, H.W. and Tornabene, T.G. 1983 Lipopolysaccharides of the
cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa. Eur. J. Biochem., 137, 333-336.
Reinikainen, M., Kiviranta, J., Ulvi, V. and Niku-Paavola, M.L. 1995 Acute toxic effects of
a novel cyanobacterial toxin on the crustaceans Artemia salina and Daphnia pulex. Arch.
Hydrobiol., 133, 61-69.
Repavich, W.M., Sonzogni, W.C., Standridge, J.H., Wedepohl, R.E. and Meisner L.F.
1990 Cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) in Wisconsin waters: acute and chronic toxicity.
Wat. Res., 24, 225-231.
Ressom, R., Soong, F.S., Fitzgerald, J., Turczynowicz, L., El Saadi, O., Roder, D.,
Maynard, T. and Falconer, I.1994 Health Effects of Toxic Cyanobacteria (Blue-green
Algae). National Health and Medical Council, The Australian Government Publishing
Service, Canberra, Australia, 108 pp.
Rinehart, K.L., Harada, K.-I., Namikoshi, M., Chen, C., Harvis, C.A., Munro, M.H.G.,
Blunt, J.W., Mulligan, P.E., Beasley, V.R., Dahlem, A.M. and Carmichael, W.W. 1988
Nodularin, microcystin, and the configuration of Adda. J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 110, 8557-
8558.
Rinehart, K.L., Namikoshi, M. and Choi, B.W. 1994 Structure and biosynthesis of toxins
from blue-green algae (Cyanobacteria). J. App. Phycol., 6, 159-176.
Rodger, H.D., Turnbull, T., Edwards, C. and Codd, G.A. 1994 Cyanobacterial bloom
associated pathology in brown trout Salmo trutta L. in Loch Leven, Scotland. J. Fish Dis.,
17, 177-181.
Rouhiainen L., Buikema, W., Paulin, L., Fonstein, M., Sivonen, K. and Haselkorn, R.
1994 Peptide synthetase genes from hepatotoxin producing Cyanobacteria. Abstract In:
VIII International Symposium on Phototrophic Prokaryotes, 10-15, September, Urbino,
Italy, 26.
Rudolph-Böhner, S., Mierke, D.F. and Moroder, L. 1994 Molecular structure of
cyanobacterial tumour-promoting microcystins. FEBS Letters, 349, 319-323.
Schwabe W., Weihe, A., Börner, T., Henning, M. and Kohl, J.G. 1988 Plasmids in toxic
and nontoxic strains of the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa. Current Microbiology,
17, 133-137.
Scott, W.E. 1991 Occurrence and significance of toxic Cyanobacteria in Southern Africa.
Wat. Sci. Techno., 23, 175-180.
Shimizu, Y. 1986 Toxigenesis and biosynthesis of saxitoxin analogues. Pure Appl.
Chem., 58, 257-262.
Shimizu, Y., Norte, M., Hori, A., Genenah, A. and Kobayashi, M. 1984 Biosynthesis of
saxitoxin analogues: the unexpected pathway. J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 106, 6433-6434.
Shirai, M., Ohtake, A., Sano, T., Matsumoto, S., Sakamoto, T., Sato, A., Aida, T.,
Harada, K.I., Shimida, T., Suzuki, M. and Nakano, M. 1991 Toxicity and toxins of natural
blooms and isolated strains of Microcystis spp. (Cyanobacteria) and improved procedure
for purification of cultures. App. Environ. Microbiol., 57, 1241-1245.
Shumway, S.E., van Egmond, H.P., Hurst, J.W. and Bean, L.L. 1995 Management of
shellfish resources. In: G.M. Hallegraeff, D.M. Anderson, A.D. Cembella and H.O
Enevoldsen [Eds] Manual on Harmful Marine Microalgae. UNESCO Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission, Manuals and Guides 33, United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, 433-457.
Sivonen, K. 1990a Toxic Cyanobacteria in Finnish Fresh Waters and the Baltic Sea.
Reports from Department of Microbiology, 39, University of Helsinki, Hakapaino, Helsinki,
87 pp.
Sivonen, K. 1990b Effects of light, temperature, nitrate, orthophosphate, and bacteria on
growth of and hepatotoxin production by Oscillatoria agardhii strains. App. Environ.
Microbiol., 56, 2658-2666.
Sivonen, K. 1996 Cyanobacterial toxins and toxin production. Phycologia, 35(6
Supplement), 12-24.
Sivonen, K., Carmichael, W.W., Namikoshi, M., Rinehart, K.L., Dahlem, A.M. and
Niemelä, S.I. 1990a Isolation and characterization of hepatotoxic microcystin
homologues from the filamentous freshwater cyanobacterium Nostoc sp. strain 152. App.
Env. Microbiol., 56, 2650-2657.
Sivonen, K., Himberg, K., Luukkainen, R., Niemelä, S.I., Poon, G.K. and Codd, G.A.
1989a Preliminary characterization of neurotoxic blooms and strains from Finland. Tax.
Assess., 4, 339-352.
Sivonen, K., Kononen, K., Carmichael, W.W., Dahlem, A.M., Rinehart, K.L., Kiviranta, J.
and Niemelä, S.I. 1989b Occurrence of the hepatotoxic cyanobacterium Nodularia
spumigena in the Baltic Sea and the structure of the toxin. App. Env. Microbiol., 55,
1990-1995.
Sivonen, K., Namikoshi, M., Evans, W.R., Carmichael, W.W., Sun, F., Rouhiainen, L.,
Luukkainen, R. and K.L. Rinehart. 1992a Isolation and characterization of a variety of
microcystins from seven strains of the cyanobacterial genus Anabaena. App. Env.
Microbiol., 58, 2495-2500.
Sivonen, K., Namikoshi, M., Evans, W.R., Färdig, M., Carmichael, W.W. and Rinehart,
K.L. 1992b Three new microcystins, cyclic heptapeptide hepatotoxins, from Nostoc sp.
strain 152. Chem. Res. Toxicol., 5, 464-469.
Sivonen, K., Namikoshi, M., Evans, W.R., Gromov, B.V., Carmichael, W.W. and
Rinehart, K.L. 1992c Isolation and structures of five microcystins from a Russian
Microcystis aeruginosa strain CALU 972. Toxicon., 30,1481-1485.
Sivonen, K., Namikoshi, M., Luukkainen, R., Färdig, M., Rouhiainen, L., Evans, W.R.,
Carmichael, W.W., Rinehart, K.L. and Niemelä, S.I. 1995 Variation of cyanobacterial
hepatotoxins in Finland. In: M. Munawar and M. Luotola [Eds] The Contaminants in the
Nordic Ecosystem, Dynamics, Processes and Fate. Ecovision World Monograph Series,
SPB Academic Publishing, Amsterdam, 163-169.
Sivonen, K., Niemelä, S.I., Niemi, R.M., Lepistö, L., Luoma, T.H. and Räsänen, L.A.
1990b Toxic cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) in Finnish fresh and coastal waters.
Hydrobiologia, 190, 267-275.
Sivonen, K., Skulberg, O.M., Namikoshi, M., Evans, W.R., Carmichael, W.W. and
Rinehart, K.L. 1992d Two methyl ester derivates of microcystins, cyclic heptapeptide
hepatotoxins, isolated from Anabaena flos-aquae strain CYA 83/1. Toxicon., 30, 1465-
1471.
Skulberg, O.M., Carmichael, W.W., Anderson, R.A., Matsunaga, S., Moore, R.E. and
Skulberg, R. 1992 Investigations of a neurotoxic Oscillatorialean strain (cyanophyceae)
and its toxin. Isolation and characterization of homoanatoxin-a. Env. Toxicol. Chem., 11,
321-329.
Skulberg, O.M., Underdal, B. and Utkilen, H. 1994 Toxic waterblooms with cyanophytes
in Norway - current knowledge. Algol. Stud., 75, 279-289
Smith, C. and Sutton, A. 1993 The persistence of anatoxin-a in reservoir water.
Foundation for Water Research, UK Report No. FR0427.
Snell, T.W. 1980 Blue-green algae and selection in rotifer populations. Oecologia Berlin,
46, 343-346.
Stevens, D.K. and Krieger, R.I. 1991 Stability studies on the cyanobacterial nicotinic
alkaloid anatoxin-a. Toxicon, 29, 167-179.
Stoner, R.D., Adams, W.H., Slatkin, D.N. and Siegelman, H.W. 1989 The effects of
single L-amino acid substitutions on the lethal potencies of the microcystins. Toxicon.,
27, 825-828.
Sugaya, Y., Yasuno, M. and Yani, T. 1990 Effects of toxic Microcystis viridis and isolated
toxins on goldfish. Jpn J. Limnol., 51(3), 149-153.
Sugiura, N. Nishimura, O. Inamori, Y. Ouchiyama, T. Sudo, R. 1997 Grazing
characteristics of musty-odour-compound-producing Phormidium tenue by a
microflagellate, Monasguttula. Wat. Res., 31(11), 2792-2796.
Swoboda, U.K., Dow, C.S., Chaivimol, J., Smith, N. and Pound, B.P. 1994 Alternatives
to the Mouse Bioassay for Cyanobacterial Toxicity Assessment. In: G.A. Codd, T.M.
Jeffries, C.W. Keevil and E. Potter [Eds] Detection Methods for Cyanobacterial Toxins.
Proceedings of the First International Symposium on Detection Methods for
Cyanobacterial Toxins, September 1993, The Royal Society of Chemistry, 106-110.
Takenaka, S. and Watanabe, M.F. 1997 Microcystin-LR degradation by Pseudomonas
aeruginosa alkaline phosphatase. Chemosphere, 34, 749-757.
Tencalla, F.G., Dietrich, D.R. and Schlatter, C. 1994 Toxicity of Microcystis aeruginosa
peptide toxin to yearling rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). Aqua. Toxicol., 30(3),
215-224.
Todorova, A. and Jttner, F. 1996 Ecotoxicological analysis of nostocyclamide, a modified
cyclic hexapeptide from Nostoc. Phycologia, 35(6 Supplement), 183-188.
Törökné, A.K. 1991 Toxin producing cyanobacteria in Hungarian fresh waters. Doctoral
Dissertation, Budapest, Hungary.
Törökné, A.K. 1997 Interlaboratory trial using Thamnotox kit for detecting cyanobacterial
toxins. In: Proceedings of VIII International Conference on Harmful Algae, Vigo, Spain,
114.
Trimurtulu, G., Ogino, J., Helzel, C.E., Husebo, T.L., Jensen, C.M., Larsen, L.K.,
Patterson, G.M.L., Moore, R.E., Mooberry, S.L., Corbett, T.H. and Valeriote, F.A. 1995
Structure determination, conformational analysis, chemical stability studies, and
antitumor evaluation of the cryptophycins. Isolation of 18 new analogs from Nostoc sp.
strain GSV 224. J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 117, 12030-12049.
Tsuji, K., Naito, S., Kondo, F., Ishikawa, N., Watanabe, M.F., Suzuki, M., Harada, K-I.
1993 Stability of microcystins from cyanobacteria: Effect of light on decomposition and
isomerization. Environ. Sci. Technol. 28, 173-177.
Tsuji, K., Setsuda, S., Watanuki, T., Kondo, F., Nakazawa, H., Suzuki, M. and Harada,
K.I. 1996 Microcystin levels during 1992-95 for lakes Sagami and Tsukui Japan. Natural
Toxins, 4, 189-194.
Utkilen, H. and Gjølme, N. 1992 Toxin production by Microcystis aeruginosa as a
function of light in continuous cultures and its ecological significance. App. Environ.
Microbiol., 58, 1321-1325.
Utkilen, H. and Gjølme, N. 1995 Iron-stimulated toxin production in Microcystis
aeruginosa. App. Environ. Microbiol., 61, 797-800.
Ueno, Y., Nagata, S., Tsutsumi, T., Hasegawa, A., Watanabe, M.F., Park, H.D., Chen,
G.C., Chen, G. and Yu, S.Z. 1996a Detection of microcystins, a blue-green algal
hepatotoxin, in drinking water sampled in Haimen and Fusui, endemic areas of primary
liver cancer in China, by highly sensitive immunoassay. Carcinogenesis, 17, 1317-1321.
Ueno, Y., Nagata, S., Tsutsumi, T., Hasegawa, A., Yoshida, F., Suttajit, M., Putsch M.
and Vasconcelos, V. 1996b Survey of microcystins in environmental water by a highly
sensitive immunoassay based on monoclonal antibody. Natural Toxins, 4, 271-276.
Van der Westhuizen, A.J. and Eloff, J.N. 1983 Effect of culture age and pH of culture
medium on the growth and toxicity of the blue green alga Microcystis aeruginosa. Zeit.
Planzenphysiol., 110, 157-163.
Van der Westhuizen, A.J. and Eloff, J.N. 1985 Effect of temperature and light on the
toxicity and growth of the blue-green alga Microcystis aeruginosa (UV-006). Planta, 163,
55-59.
Van der Westhuizen, A.J., Eloff, J.N. and Krüger, G.H.J. 1986 Effect of temperature and
light (fluence rate) on the composition of the toxin of the cyanobacterium Microcystis
aeruginosa (UV-006). Arch. Hydrobiol., 108, 145-154.
Vasconcelos, V.M. 1994 Toxic cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) in Portuguese fresh
waters. Arch Hydrobiol., 130, 439-451.
Vasconcelos, V.M., Sivonen, K., Evans, W.R., Carmichael, W.W. and Namikoshi, M.
1995 Isolation and characterization of microcystins (heptapetide hepatotoxins) from
Portuguese strains of Microcystis aeruginosa Kutz emend Elekin. Arch. Hydrobiol., 134,
295-305.
Vasconcelos, V.M., Sivonen, K., Evans, W.R., Carmichael, W.W. and Namikoshi, M.
1996 Microcystin (heptapeptide hepatotoxins) diversity in cyanobacterial blooms
collected in Portuguese fresh waters. Wat. Res., 30, 2377-2384.
Vezie, C., Brient, L., Sivonen, K., Betru, G., Lefeuvre, J.C. and Salkinoja-Salonen, M.
1997 Occurrence of microcystins containing cyanobacterial blooms in freshwaters of
Brittany (France). Arch. Hydrobiol., 139, 401-413.
Vezie, C., Brient, L., Sivonen, K., Bertru, G., Lefeuvre, J.C. and Salkinoja-Salonen, M.
1998 Variation of microcystin content of cyanobacterial blooms and isolated strains in
Grand-Lieu lake (France). Microbiol. Ecol., 35, 126-135.
Von Elert, E. and Juttner, F. 1996 Factors influencing the allelopathic activity of the
planktonic cyanobacterium Trichormus doliolum. Phycologia, 35(6 Supplement), 68-73.
Watanabe, M. F. 1996 Production of Microcystins. In: M.F. Watanabe, H. Harada, W. W.
Carmichael and H. Fujiki, [Eds] Toxic Microcystis. CRC Press, London, 262 pp.
Watanabe, M.F. and Oishi, S. 1980 Toxicities of Microcystis aeruginosa collected from
some lakes, reservoirs, ponds and moat in Tokyo and adjacent regions. J. Limnol., 41,
5-9.
Watanabe, M.F. and Oishi, S. 1985 Effects of environmental factors on toxicity of a
cyanobacterium (Microcystis aeruginosa) under culture conditions. App. Environ.
Microbiol., 49, 1342-1344.
Watanabe, M.F., Harada, K.I., Matsuura, K., Oishi, S., Watanabe, Y. and Suzuki, M.
1989 Heptapeptide toxins contained in natural samples of Microcystis species. Tox.
Assess., 4, 487-497.
Watanabe M.F., Oishi, S., Harada, K-.I., Matsuura, K., Kawai, H. and Suzuki, M. 1988
Toxins contained in Microcystis species of cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). Toxicon,
26, 1017-1025.
Watanabe, M.F., Oishi, S., Watanabe, Y. and Watanabe, M. 1986 Strong probability of
lethal toxicity in the blue-green alga Microcystis viridis Lemmermann. J. Phycol., 22,
552-556.
Watanabe, M.F., Park, H-D., Kondo, F., Harada, K-I., Hayashi, H. and Okino, T. 1997
Identification and estimation of microcystins in freshwater mussels. Nat. Toxins, 5, 31-35.
Watanabe, M.M., Kaya, K. and Takamura, N. 1992 Fate of the toxic cyclic heptapeptides,
the microcystins, from blooms of Microcystis (cyanobacteria) in a hypertrophic lake. J.
Phycol., 28, 761-767.
Watanabe, M.M., Zhang, X and Kaya, K. 1996 Fate of toxic cyclic heptapeptides,
microcystins, in toxic cyanobacteria upon grazing by the mixotrophic flagellate
Poterioochromonas malhamensis (Ochromonadales, Chrysophyceae). Phycologia, 35(6
Supplement), 203-206.
Weckesser, J. and Drews, G. 1979 Lipopolysaccharides of photosynthetic prokaryotes.
Ann. Rev. Microbiol., 33, 215-239.
Weckesser, J., Martin, C. and Jakobi, C. 1996 Cyanopeptolins, depsipeptides from
cyanobacteria. System. App. Microbiol., 19, 133-138.
Weise, G., Drews, G., Jann, B. and Jann, K. 1970 Identification and analysis of
lipopolysaccharide in cell walls of the blue-green algae Anacystis nidulans. Arch.
Microbiol., 71, 89-98.
Welker, M. and Steinberg, C.E.W. 1998 Indirect photolysis of cyanotoxins: one possible
mechanism of their low persistence. Wat. Res. (In Press).
Wicks, R.J. and Thiel, P.G. 1990 Environmental factors affecting the production of
peptide toxins in floating scums of cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa in a
hypertrophic African reservoir. Environ. Sci. Technol., 24, 1413-1418.
Wiedner, C. and Nixdorf, B. 1997 Verbreitung und Steuerung der Entwicklung von
toxischen und nicht-toxischen Cyanobakterien in ostbrandenburgischen Gewässern
unterschiedlicher Trophie und Hydrographie im Zuge der reduzierten Belastung.
WaBoLu-Hefte 4/97, Berlin ISSN 0175-4211.
Willn, T. and Mattsson, R. 1997 Water-blooming and toxin-producing cyanobacteria in
Swedish fresh and brackish waters, 1981-1995. Hydrobiologia, 353, 181-192.
Williams, D.E., Craig, M., Dawe, S.C., Kent, M.C., Holmes, C.F.B. and Anderson, R.J.
1997 Evidence for a covalently bound form of microcystin-LR in salmon larvae and
dungeness crab larvae. Chem. Res. Toxicol., 10, 463-469.
Yanni, Y.G. and Carmichael, W.W. 1997 Screening of cyanobacteria isolated from soil,
rice fields and water resources of the Nile Delta for production of cyanotoxins. Abstract,
In: VIII International Conference on Harmful Algae, 25-29 June, 1997 Vigo, Spain, 216.
Yoo, S., Carmichael, W.W., Hoehn, R.C. and Hrudey, S.E. 1995 Cyanobacterial (Blue-
green Algal) Toxins: A Resource Guide. American Water Works Association Research
Foundation, Denver, Colorado.
Zhang, Q.X., Carmichael, W.W., Yu, M.J. and Li, S.H. 1991 Cyclic peptide hepatotoxins
from freshwater cyanobacterial (blue-green algae) waterblooms collected in central
China. Env. Toxicol. Chem., 10, 313-321.
Zhang, X. Watanabe, M.M., Inouye, I. 1996 Light and electron microscopy of grazing by
flagellate Poterioochromonas malhamensis (Chrysophyceae) on a range of
phytoplankton taxa. J. Phycol., 32, 37-46.
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health consequences,
monitoring and management
Edited by Ingrid Chorus and Jamie Bartram
© 1999 WHO
ISBN 0-419-23930-8
Chapter 4. HUMAN HEALTH ASPECTS
This chapter was prepared by Tine Kuiper-Goodman, Ian Falconer and Jim Fitzgerald
Evidence for adverse human health effects from cyanotoxins derives from three principal
sources: epidemiological evidence including human poisonings, animal poisonings, and
toxicological studies.
Epidemiological evidence results from studies of human populations that have shown
symptoms of poisoning or injury attributed to the presence of cyanotoxins in drinking
water or other sources of water. This type of evidence depends upon good case
definition, good characterisation of exposure and a reporting system that enables these
data to be compared. Such evidence, discussed later, includes the fatal intoxication by
microcystin of 50 dialysis patients in Brazil, and the hospitalisation of 140 children
supplied with water from a dam containing Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii in Australia.
Reports of gastro-enteritis after the appearance of cyanobacterial blooms in drinking
water sources come from North and South America, Africa and Europe. Most cases of
human injury attributed to cyanobacterial toxins have been studied retrospectively, and
complete epidemiological data, especially regarding exposure (number of organisms,
type and concentration of cyanotoxins), are rarely available. Nevertheless,
epidemiological evidence is of special importance in directly demonstrating the link
between toxin exposures and human health outcomes, which otherwise cannot be
derived directly from animal experiments.
A large number of animal poisonings have been recorded, some of which have been
reported in detail, while others are anecdotal. These are important in the overall body of
knowledge on cyanobacterial toxicity, because they demonstrate effects under natural
conditions. However, cyanotoxin exposure is rarely quantified and cannot be directly
extrapolated to human populations.
Although animal toxicity tests are not performed under conditions of natural exposure
and are undertaken with different species, they are of particular importance because
they are conducted under controlled laboratory conditions. They provide plausibility for
the role of cyanotoxins in human and animal poisonings, and provide information on their
comparative toxicity. Oral toxicity testing is especially relevant, and has been carried out
on large animals as well as on rodents.
The overall case for the human health relevance of exposure to cyanotoxins can only be
assessed properly by combining all available evidence and understanding its strength
and its weaknesses.
Of all the cyanobacterial toxins currently known, the cyclic peptides represent the
greatest concern to human health because of the potential risk of long-term exposure to
comparatively low concentrations of the toxins in drinking water supplies. As will be
discussed in sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2, the cyclic peptide microcystins and nodularins are
specific liver poisons in mammals. Following acute exposure to high doses, they cause
death from liver haemorrhage or from liver failure, and they may promote the growth of
liver and other tumours following chronic exposures to low doses.
The alkaloid neurotoxins (anatoxins and saxitoxins/PSP toxins) have shown only acute
effects in mammals. Risk assessment will, therefore, be limited to acute exposure.
However, there are a number of complicating factors. Firstly, while there is a great deal
of published information on the mammalian and human toxicity and toxicology of
saxitoxins/PSP toxins, the animal data for anatoxins is rather sparse, and completely
lacking for human exposure. Secondly, some of the alkaloid toxins, PSP toxins in
particular, are known to accumulate to high concentrations in marine and freshwater
biota (see section 3.4.5). In many areas of the world, the local human population will be
consuming fish, shellfish and animals that have grown in, or nearby, water bodies
contaminated with toxic cyanobacteria. Thus there may be several sources of oral
exposure for neurotoxins in addition to drinking water or recreational water. The potential
for transfer of PSP toxins, and possibly other neurotoxins, to humans via these routes
may be significant in freshwaters.
The toxicity of pure cylindrospermopsin has recently been studied following the
identification of the toxin in 1992 (Ohtani et al., 1992). These studies have helped to
characterise the histopathology of cylindrospermopsin after intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection
(Hawkins et al., 1997; Falconer et al., 1999; Seawright et al., 1999). It is not known
whether cylindrospermopsin will elicit histopathological damage following chronic (long-
term) exposure at low concentrations.
Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) from cyanobacteria can elicit both allergic and toxic
responses in humans, although little is known about their acute or chronic effects. The
lipid part of the molecule is believed to cause the deleterious response in humans, while
the sugar moiety is important in determining LPS solubility and micelle properties, and
hence is important in modulating toxicity. A lack of knowledge regarding the occurrence
and toxicity of cyanobacterial LPS, combined with the diversity of LPS structures within
the cyanobacteria, should be considered by health officials and water managers,
particularly when gastrointestinal and respiratory symptoms are reported from exposed
humans.
4.1 Human and animal poisonings
Water supplies have been associated with gastrointestinal illness throughout human
history with cholera, dysentery, and typhoid responsible for much human misery and
death. The epidemiological evidence for human illness due to cyanobacterial toxins
therefore has to be viewed against a background of alternative causes, with bacterial,
viral or protozoal infections being the first causes to be investigated.
4.1.1 Short-term effects in humans
The recorded cases of gastrointestinal and hepatic illness that can be reliably attributed
to cyanobacterial toxins in water supplies have all been coincident with either the
breakdown of a natural cyanobacterial bloom or with the artificial lysis of a bloom by
application of copper sulphate. Both mechanisms lead to cyanotoxin release from
decomposing cells. Whereas treatment procedures might have removed cyanotoxins
bound in intact cells, they were not effective in removing the dissolved cyanotoxins in
these cases. The earliest reported cases of gastro-enteritis from cyanobacteria were in
the population of a series of towns along the Ohio River in 1931. In these cases low
rainfall had caused the water of a side branch of the river to develop a cyanobacterial
bloom which was then washed into the main river. As this water moved downstream a
series of outbreaks of illness were reported, which could not be attributed to infectious
agents (Tisdale, 1931). In Harare, Zimbabwe, children living in an area of the city
supplied from a particular water reservoir, developed gastro-enteritis each year at the
time when a natural bloom of Microcystis was decaying in the reservoir. Other children in
the city with different water supplies were not affected and no infectious agent was
identified (Zilberg, 1966). The most lethal outbreak attributed to cyanobacterial toxins in
drinking water occurred in Brazil, when a newly flooded dam developed an immense
cyanobacterial bloom. Eighty-eight deaths, mostly children, were reported to have
occurred (Teixera et al., 1993) (Box 4.1).
Examples of illness following the use of copper sulphate to destroy a cyanobacterial
bloom in a water storage reservoir have been described in the USA and in Australia. In
each of these instances the cyanobacterial genera involved were identified, either at the
time or subsequently. In one incident, 62 per cent of the population connected to a
filtered, chlorinated water supply developed symptoms of gastro-enteritis within a period
of five days. No pathogens were found, and it was concluded that abloom of
cyanobacteria in an open storage reservoir which had over 100,000 cells per ml of
Schizothrix calcola, Plectonema, Phormidium and Lyngbya was responsible. The
reservoir had just been treated with copper sulphate (Lippy and Erb, 1976).
Box 4.1 Gastro-enteritis epidemic in the area of the Itaparica Dam, Bahia, Brazil
A severe gastro-enteritis epidemic in the Paulo Afonso region of Bahia State in Brazil followed the
flooding of the newly constructed Itaparica Dam reservoir in 1988. Some 2,000 gastro-enteritis
cases, 88 of which resulted in death, were reported over a 42-day period.
Clinical data and water sample tests were reviewed, blood and faecal specimens from gastro-
enteritis patients were subjected to bacteriological, virological and toxicological testing and
drinking water samples were examined for micro-organisms and heavy metals. The results
demonstrated that the source of the outbreak was water impounded by the dam and pointed to
toxin produced by cyanobacteria present in the water as the responsible agent. No other
infectious agent or toxin was identified, and cases occurred in patients who had been drinking
only boiled water. The cases were restricted to areas supplied with drinking water from the dam.
Cyanobacteria of the Anabaena and Microcystis genera were present in untreated water at 1,104
to 9,755 units per ml (conversion of colony units to cells per ml depends on colony size, but a
minimum of 100 cells per colony is likely in a mixed bloom of these genera).
In Armidale, Australia, the water supply reservoir had been monitored for blooms of toxic
Microcystis for several years, when a particularly dense bloom occurred. Within three
weeks the water supply authority treated the reservoir with 1 ppm (part per million) of
copper sulphate, which killed the bloom. An epidemiological study of the local population
indicated liver damage occurring simultaneously with the termination of the bloom (see
Box 4.2).
A more severe outbreak of cyanobacterial toxicity in a human population occurred on an
island off the north-eastern coast of Australia. Due to complaints of bad taste and odour
in the water supply, which were attributed to a cyanobacterial bloom, the authorities
treated the reservoir with copper sulphate. Within a week numerous children developed
severe hepato-enteritis, and a total of 140 children and 10 adults required hospital
treatment (Byth, 1980). Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii was identified as the
cyanobacterium responsible for this episode (see Box 4.3).
Within human populations, for a variety of reasons, there will be individuals who are at a
much greater risk of injury from cyanotoxins than the population as a whole. Children are
the most obvious example, because they drink a higher volume of water in proportion to
their body weight than adults. Individuals who already have injury to organs susceptible
to cyanobacterial toxins are also at increased risk, such as people with hepatitis, liver
cirrhosis, toxic liver injury from other sources, or kidney damage. Kidney dialysis patients,
if exposed to microcystins in the water used for dialysis, are especially vulnerable
because treatment exposes them intravenously to large volumes of water. In a
disastrous incident in Caruaru, Brazil, 117 patients developed cholestatic liver disease
and at least 47 deaths were attributed to dialysis with water containing cyanobacterial
toxins. Examination of the carbon filter from the dialysis unit demonstrated microcystin-
LR, as did the blood and liver tissue of deceased patients (Jochimsen et al., 1998) (see
Box 4.4).
Box 4.2 Toxic Microcystis in the Armidale water supply reservoir and public health
The city of Armidale, New South Wales, Australia has a drinking water supply from a eutrophic
reservoir which has experienced repeated blooms of Microcystis aeruginosa from the early 1970s
to the present day. The reservoir, Malpas Dam, is on a plateau 150 m higher than the treatment
plant to which it is connected by about 20 km of pipeline. The plant treated water by pre-
chlorination, alum flocculation, sedimentation, rapid sand filtration and post chlorination and
fluoridation. The geography of the water storage results in toxic scums accumulating around the
offtake area through wind-drift. The local water authority use copper sulphate dosing to control
blooms, with aerial distribution of 1 ppm of copper in the top metre of water. The cyanobacterial
blooms have been monitored for toxicity, and the toxin has been characterised as microcystin-YM
(Botes et al., 1985).
In 1981, a particularly extensive toxic bloom of Microcystis was monitored during its development
and subsequent termination with copper sulphate. At the time of this bloom, complaints of bad
taste and odour were received, leading to the copper sulphate treatment of the reservoir. This
event was used as the basis for a retrospective epidemiological study of liver function in the
population consuming the water, compared with a population in the same region supplied from
other reservoirs. The data for the activity of plasma enzymes measuring liver function were
obtained for patients having blood samples at the Regional Pathology Laboratory for the six
weeks prior to the bloom, the six weeks of peak bloom and its termination, and for six weeks after
that. The data were then separated into analyses from patients having the Malpas drinking water
supply, and those using other supplies.
Serum enzymes measuring liver function in patients consuming drinking water from Malpas Dam
or from other supplies during a heavy bloom of Microcystis aeruginosa and its termination with
copper. GGT = gamma glutamyl transferase; ALT = alanine aminotransferase; AST = aspartate
aminotransferase; AP = alkaline phosphatase (From The Medical Journal of Australia, 1983;
1511-1514)
As shown in the figure above, a statistically significant increase in gamma glutamyl transferase in
the blood was seen with the group using the Malpas water supply during the peak of the bloom
and its lysis with copper sulphate, compared with the same population before and after, or the
other population on independent water supplies. The clinical record gave no evidence of an
infectious hepatitis outbreak or disproportionate alcoholism (Falconer et al., 1983). While the
mean increase in enzyme activity was indicative of minor liver toxicity, individuals within the
population studied had highly elevated enzyme activity, indicating substantial liver damage. The
serum enzyme showing this change has also been used as an indicator of Microcystis toxicity in
experimental studies with pigs and rodents, where it is an effective marker for liver injury (Fawell
et al., 1993; Falconer et al., 1994).
4.1.2 Chronic effects in humans
While acute toxicity is the most obvious problem in cyanobacterial poisoning, a long-term
risk may also be present. Short exposures to toxins may result in long-term injury, and
chronic low-level exposure may cause adverse health effects. Animal experiments have
shown chronic liver injury from continuing oral exposure to microcystins. In particular the
possibility of carcinogenesis and tumour growth promotion need careful evaluation,
because both have been shown in animal experimentation.
The incidence of human hepatocellular carcinoma in China is one of the highest in the
world, and studies have explored whether cyanobacterial toxins are part of a complex of
risk factors which increase the incidence of this disease. The distribution of
hepatocellular carcinoma varies geographically. In south-east China, rates of less than
15 incidents per 100,000 people are seen in some districts, compared with over 60
incidents per 100,000 people in adjacent localities. Two proven risk factors are infection
with hepatitis B virus and intake of aflatoxin B from food items, such as corn. The third
1
significant element of association was the source of drinking water. On a village basis,
lower cancer mortality rates were seen when the water was drawn from deep wells,
compared with much higher rates when the water came from ponds and ditches.
Cyanobacteria are abundant in surface waters in south east China where the incidence
of hepatocellular carcinoma is highest, and it has been proposed that microcystins in the
drinking water are responsible for the higher incidences of cancer among drinkers of
pond and ditch water (Yu, 1989, 1995). Very low levels of cyanotoxins were found in one
study with limited sampling of some drinking water sources in China (Ueno et al., 1996),
but a more representative study would be needed to investigate this association. At
present, all three risk factors are being reduced concurrently in China and liver cancer
rates appear to be decreasing (Yu, 1995) (see also Box 5.3).
Box 4.3 Palm Island Mystery Disease
In 1979, there was a major outbreak of hepato-enteritis among the children of an Aboriginal
community living on a tropical island off the coast of Queensland, Australia. Altogether 140
children and 10 adults required treatment, which was provided by the local hospital for less
severe cases and by the regional hospital on the mainland for severe cases possibly requiring
intensive care. Diagnostic information included a detailed clinical examination showing malaise,
anorexia, vomiting, headache, painful liver enlargement, initial constipation followed by bloody
diarrhoea and varying levels of severity of dehydration. Urine analysis showed electrolyte loss
together with glucose, ketones, protein and blood in the urine, demonstrating extensive kidney
damage. This was the major life-threatening element of the poisoning. Blood analysis showed
elevated serum liver enzymes in some children, indicating liver damage. Sixty-nine percent of
patients required intravenous therapy and in the more severe cases the individuals went into
hypovolaemic/acidotic shock. After appropriate treatment all the patients recovered (Byth, 1980).
Examination of faecal samples and foods eliminated a range of infectious organisms and
toxins as possible causes for the outbreak, hence the name "Palm Island Mystery Disease". The
affected population, however, all received their drinking water supply from one source, Solomon
Dam. Families on alternative water supplies on the island were not affected by the disease.
Prior to the outbreak of the illness an algal bloom occurred in Solomon Dam. The bloom
discoloured the water and gave it a disagreeable odour and taste. When the bloom became
dense, the dam reservoir was treated with 1 ppm of copper sulphate (Bourke et al., 1983).
Clinical injury among consumers on that water supply was reported the following week.
The organisms from the dam were cultured and administered to mice, following which the
mice slowly (over several days) developed widespread tissue injury involving the gastrointestinal
tract, the kidney and liver (Hawkins et al., 1985). The widespread tissue damage and delayed
effects are quite different to those following Microcystis aeruginosa administration (Falconer et al.,
1981; see section 4.2.1).
Subsequent monitoring of the algal blooms in the dam identified the cyano-bacterium
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii as the cause of the blooms, with seasonal cell concentrations of
up to 300,000 cells per ml of water. This organism does not form scums, and has the highest cell
concentrations well below the water surface. In order to reduce bloom formation, the responsible
authorities later introduced destratification of the reservoir (Hawkins and Griffiths, 1993).
Subsequent research on toxins produced by Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii has identified
the cytotoxic alkaloid cylindrospermopsin which is toxic after i.p. and oral administration. It is
possible that other toxins will be isolated from this organism (Hawkins et al., 1997, see also
section 4.2.7).
Box 4.4 Outbreak of severe hepatitis following haemodialysis in Caruaru, Brazil
In February 1996, an outbreak of severe hepatitis occurred at a Brazilian haemodialysis centre in
Caruaru, Brazil, located 134 km from Recife, the state capital of Pernambuco. At this clinic 117 of
136 patients (86 per cent) experienced visual disturbances, nausea, vomiting, muscle weakness
and painful hepatomegaly, following routine haemodialysis treatment. Subsequently, 100 patients
developed acute liver failure and 50 of these died. As of October 1997, 49 of the deaths could be
attributed to a common syndrome now called "Caruaru Syndrome". This syndrome includes:
• Symptoms. Painful huge hepatomegaly, jaundice and a bleeding diathesis manifested
by ecchymosis, epistaxis and metrorrhagia.
• Laboratory picture. Elevated transaminases, variable hyperbilirubinemia, prolonged
prothrombin time and severe hypertriglyceridemia.
• Histopathology. Light microscopy - disruption of liver plates, liver cell deformity,
necrosis, apoptosis, cholestasis, cytoplasmic vacuolisation, mixed leukocyte infiltration
and multinucleated hepatocytes; electron microscopy - intracellular oedema,
mitochondrial changes, rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum injuries, lipid vacuoles
and residual bodies.
The pattern of liver plate disruption was identical to that found with previous laboratory animal
experiments involving microcystin exposure.
Initial reports, at the beginning of March 1996, from the medical and public health profession in
Pernambuco, implicated several xenobiotic or microbial sources as possibly responsible for a
cluster of human fatalities. However, comparison with previous knowledge about cyanotoxicosis,
from other parts of the world, suggested that cyanobacteria toxins might be responsible. Since
phytoplankton counts were not being made by the city's water utility at the time of the outbreak,
the presence of toxic cyanobacteria or microcystin could not be confirmed or denied. Examination
of previous years' phytoplankton counts showed that cyanobacteria had been dominant in the
reservoir during the summer months since at least 1990, with the most common genera present
being Microcystis, Anabaena and Anabaenopis (Cylindrospermopsis). Samples collected on
March 29, 1996 showed that the most common cyanobacteria present were Aphanizomenon,
Oscillatoria and Spirulina (average number 24,500 cells per ml).
Carbon from the dialysis centre's in-house water treatment system showed chromatogram peaks
that had characteristics of microcystins when analysed using HPLC. One of these peaks had a
retention time corresponding to microcystin-LR, the most commonly found of the microcystin
family. Further examination of carbon, sand and cation/anion exchange filters showed microcystin
in the ppm range.
Blood sera, provided by state health officials in Pernambuco and sent through the Centers for
Disease Control in Atlanta Georgia, USA, from affected and control patients, and liver tissue from
deceased patients, showed a microcystin content of up to 10 ng ml-1 for sera and 0.1 to 0.5 ng
mg-1 in liver tissue. All exposed patient sera and tissue were positive for microcystins. Chemical
analysis of the most abundant microcystins revealed the presence of microcystins -YR, -LR and -
AR. The average microcystin concentration in liver samples from 33 victims compares closely
with that reported in laboratory test animals receiving acute exposure to microcystin-LR. When
the analyses are completed, the resulting information on dose and related effects will be
important in the hazard characterisation and risk assessment of microcystins in humans. A clinic
for survivors set up by Brazilian health authorities will help monitor their progress and serve as a
data base to assess long-term health effects, including cancer rates, because the microcystins
are known to be potent liver tumour promoters in experimental animals.
The available biological and chemical evidence supports microcystins from the reservoir water as
being the major factor in the deaths of patients at the dialysis clinic. The occurrence of
microcystin in the water used for dialysis was due to insufficient treatment of the water obtained
by truck from the city's water treatment system, as well as to insufficient functioning and
maintenance of the clinic's dialysis water treatment system.
4.1.3 Injury from recreational exposure
There have been repeated descriptions of adverse health consequences for swimmers
exposed to cyanobacterial blooms. Even minor contact with cyanobacteria in bathing
water can lead to skin irritation and increased likelihood of gastrointestinal symptoms
(Pilotto et al., 1997), Some severe skin reactions have been reported, particularly from
contact with the marine cyanobacterium, Lyngbya majuscula, which causes deep
blistering when trapped under the bathing suit of swimmers (Grauer, 1961). In this case
the organism contains a powerful dermal toxin which is further described in section 4.2.8.
Individual sensitivity to cyanobacteria in bathing waters varies greatly, because there
can be both allergic reactions and direct responses to toxins. The cyanobacterial
pigments can cause severe allergic reactions in sensitive individuals (Cohen and Reif,
1953). Cyanobacteria have features in common with general airborne allergens and
surveys have shown allergic responses to cyanobacteria in patients with naso-bronchial
allergy (Mittal et al., 1979). More extensive discussion on this aspect can be found in
Ressom et al. (1994). Illnesses from accidental swallowing of cyanobacteria during
swimming are described in Box 4.5.
4.1.4 Animal poisonings
Numerous cases of animal poisoning (often lethal) substantiate the concern of health
hazards for humans exposed to cyanobacteria. Therefore, the most important incidents
are reported below. For impact of cyanotoxins on aquatic biota, see section 3.5.
The first report of cyanobacterial poisoning was of the deaths of cattle, sheep, dogs,
horses and pigs after drinking a scum of Nodularia spumigena in Lake Alexandrina,
Australia (Francis, 1878). Francis confirmed the source of poisoning by dosing a calf
with the scum from the lake, which subsequently caused the death of the animal. Since
that time there have been frequent instances of farm animal poisonings from
cyanobacterial water blooms, and also deaths of pet dogs after swimming in, or eating,
cyanobacteria. Other affected animals range in size from ducks, coots and other
waterfowl, to skunks and mink, and even up to rhinoceros (see Carmichael, 1992).
Besides the consumption of cyanobacteria from the water, it has been suggested that an
additional source of intoxication for terrestrial animals is cyanotoxins that have
bioaccumulated in the food chain. For example, freshwater mussels accumulate both
microcystins (Prepas et al., 1997) and saxitoxins (Negri and Jones, 1995), and mussels
are an important food source for water rats, musk rats and birds.
An extensive list of poisoning incidents, and discussion of them, is included in Ressom
et al. (1994). A selected group is given in Table 4.1. As with cases of suspected human
poisoning by cyanobacterial toxins, in the earlier cases much of the evidence necessary
for proof of poisoning is unavailable. Ideally, for such proof, the toxic organisms or toxins
need to be identified in the body of the victim, together with the evidence of access to
toxic material (see also section 3.5). One of the most convincing mammalian poisonings
has been the recorded deaths of sheep drinking from a farm dam contaminated with the
neurotoxic Anabaena circinalis in Australia (Negri et al., 1995). The authors recovered
high concentrations of saxitoxins from cyanobacteria in the farm dam and from the
rumen fluid from the dead sheep.
Box 4.5 Examples of health effects due to recreational exposure
1959 Saskatchewan, Canada. In spite of recreational use warnings and deaths in livestock,
people swam in a lake infested with cyanobacteria. Thirteen persons became ill (headaches,
nausea, muscular pains, painful diarrhoea). In the excreta of one patient (a medical doctor who
had accidentally ingested 300 ml of water), numerous cells of Microcystis spp. and some
trichomes of Anabaena circinalis were identified (Dillenberg and Dehnel, 1960).
1989 United Kingdom. Ten of 20 army recruits showed symptoms indicating intoxication (e.g.
vomiting, diarrhoea, central abdominal pain, blistering of the lips, sore throats) after swimming
and canoe training in water with a dense bloom of Microcystis spp. Two of the recruits developed
severe pneumonia attributed to the aspiration of a Microcystis toxin and needed hospitalisation
and intensive care (Turner et al., 1990). The severity of illness appeared to be related to the
swimming skills and amount of water ingested.
1995 Australia. Epidemiological evidence of adverse health effects after recreational water
contact was established in a prospective study involving 852 participants. Results showed an
elevated incidence of diarrhoea, vomiting, flu symptoms, skin rashes, mouth ulcers, fevers, eye or
ear irritations within seven days following exposure (Pilotto et al., 1997). Symptoms increased
significantly with duration of water contact and cell density of cyanobacteria.
The post mortem symptoms of toxicity can also be characteristic of the poison involved.
Animal deaths from cyanobacterial toxicity have been reported from North and South
America, Europe, Australia and Africa. The major injury reported is hepatotoxicosis, i.e.
liver poisoning. The cyanobacteria responsible have been Microcystis aeruginosa,
Nodularia spumigena and Oscillatoria (Planktothrix) agardhii. In the most recent cases,
post mortem examination has shown evidence of cyanobacterial ingestion as well as
characteristic tissue injury in the liver.
Table 4.1 Selected examples of animal poisoning associated with cyanobacteria
Country Species killed Pathology Organism Reference
Argentina Cattle Hepatotoxicity Microcystis Odriozola et al., 1984
aeruginosa
Australia Sheep Hepatotoxicity Microcystis Jackson et al., 1984
aeruginosa
Australia Sheep Neurotoxicity, PSPs Anabaena Negri et al., 1995
circinalis
Canada Cattle Neurotoxicity, Anabaena flos- Carmichael and
anatoxin-a aquae Gorham, 1978
Canada Waterfowl Neurotoxicity, Anabaena flos- Pybus and Hobson,
anatoxin-a aquae 1986
Finland Dogs Hepatotoxicity, Nodularia Perrson et al., 1984
nodularin spumigena
Finland Waterfowl, fish, Hepatotoxicity, gill Planktothrix Eriksson et al., 1986
muskrats damage agardhii
Norway Cattle Hepatotoxicity, Microcystis Skulberg, 1979
microcystin aeruginosa
UK
England Shepherd dogs Hepatotoxicity, Microcystis Pearson et al., 1990
microcystin aeruginosa
Scotland Dogs Neurotoxicity, Oscillatoria spp. Gunn et al., 1992
anatoxin-a
Scotland Fish (trout) Gill injury, microcystin Microcystis Bury et al., 1995
aeruginosa
USA Dogs Neurotoxicity, Anabaena flos- Mahmood et al., 1988
anatoxin-a(S) aquae
PSPs Paralytic shellfish poisons
The other main cause of livestock and pet deaths due to cyanobacterial toxins has been
from acute neurotoxicity leading to respiratory failure, with no post mortem indications of
organ injury. In one case (Gunn et al., 1992) the neurotoxin, anatoxin-a, was isolated
from the stomach contents of a dog. Henriksen et al., (1997) demonstrated lethality in
wild ducks due to anatoxin-a(S). The cyanobacteria associated with deaths from
neurotoxicity are Anabaena flos-aquae, Anabaena circinalis, Aphanizomenon flos-aquae
and Oscillatoria spp. The toxins anatoxin-a, anatoxin-a(S) and saxitoxins have been
implicated in different cases.
While the reported deaths have usually occurred shortly after the animals have ingested
cyanobacterial scums, lasting injury with progressive mortality has also been seen in
animal poisoning by Microcystis aeruginosa. The characteristic symptoms are those of
liver failure with secondary photo-sensitisation, i.e. severe sunburn-like reactions
(McBarron and May, 1966; Carbis et al., 1995).
4.2 Toxicological studies
In order to set safe levels of toxicants or contaminants in food or drinking water, it is first
necessary to determine the dose level in humans that is considered to be without
adverse effects when taken daily over a lifetime; this is known as the Tolerable Daily
Intake (TDI). Ideally, this value is derived from human studies, but often such studies are
inadequate or non-existent. Alternatively, when there is an adequate experimental
database, it can be derived from animal studies. One of the major shortcomings of
animal studies is that differences in sensitivity between animals and humans vary, so
that safety factors need to be incorporated to deal with this uncertainty (see below).
A further important extrapolation problem associated with animal studies relates to
routes of exposure. Many toxins are more toxic when given by the intravenous (i.v.) or
i.p. route of administration than by the oral route. This difference is evident when LD
50
values (single dose level that will cause death in 50 per cent of the exposed animals
within 7-14 days) are examined for various routes of exposure (see Chapter 3 and Table
4.2). Studies using the i.p. or i.v. route of administration require much less toxin and can
be used to indicate relative acute toxicity and may provide information on the
mechanism of toxicity. Such studies are used in bioassays (see section 13.3.1), but they
have little use in predicting toxicity after oral administration. Another problem with many
natural toxins, including cyanotoxins, is obtaining sufficient pure toxin to conduct
controlled experiments. Several studies, to be described, have used algal extracts rather
than pure toxin. An advantage of this is that the extract more closely mimics the real
environmental situation. A disadvantage is that unless the extract is fully characterised
for all the toxins that may be present and their concentrations, the assay may have
limited predictive value for scenarios involving other conditions.
Several steps are involved in determining the TDI from appropriate human or animal
studies. The highest dose associated with the absence of adverse health effects (the
NOAEL or No Observed Adverse Effect Level) is selected or, when no NOAEL is
available, the lowest dose associated with adverse effects (the LOAEL or Lowest
Observed Adverse Effect Level) is selected. In order to extrapolate from animal data to
the human situation, the next step involves the application of a number of uncertainty
factors. In the absence of reliable data on inter- and intraspecies differences in
sensitivity to a chemical substance, standard default uncertainty factors of 10 are
generally used to give a composite uncertainty factor of 100. Additional uncertainty
factors may be used to deal with inadequacies in the database and the severity of
effects noted (WHO, 1993; IPCS, 1994). When extrapolating from human data, it is also
necessary to use some of these factors. With human data there are, in addition, often
problems in determining exposure accurately and thus the dose causing adverse effects.
The expert review of the pertinent literature in April 1997, which led to the production of
this book, revealed that information currently available is insufficient for calculation of a
TDI for most of the cyanotoxins. For microcystin-LR more data exist and a provisional
value could be derived. The following sections summarise the present health-related
information on each of the cyanotoxins, in order to provide research data to health
officers and others, and in order to provide a basis for the assessment of the health
hazards of cyanotoxins.
4.2.1 Microcystins
In the various reported incidents of poisoning in humans and livestock caused by
cyanobacteria or their toxins, Microcystis is the most frequently cited organism. As a
consequence, extensive experimental studies have been carried out on this
cyanobacterium and its toxins. Although there is qualitative evidence of cause and effect,
indicating human susceptibility, these data have so far been inadequate to establish a
dose response relationship that can be used for assessing human risk in a variety of
exposure scenarios. The animal studies described below have been conducted in an
attempt to address these issues.
Metabolic disposition
There have been no pharmacokinetic studies with orally administered microcystins. After
i.v. or i.p. injection of sublethal doses of variously radiolabelled microcystins in mice and
rats, about 70 per cent of the toxin was rapidly localised in the liver (Falconer et al., 1986;
Runnegar et al., 1986; Brooks and Codd, 1987; Robinson et al., 1989, 1991; Meriluoto et
al., 1990; Lin and Chu, 1994a; Nishiwaki et al., 1994). Plasma half-lives of microcystin-
LR, after i.v. administration, were 0.8 and 6.9 minutes for the first and second phases of
elimination, but the concentration of radioactive (3H-microcystin-LR) label in the liver did
not change throughout the later part of the six-day study period (Robinson et al., 1991).
In this study, about 9 per cent of the dose was excreted early via the urinary route, with
the remainder being excreted slowly (~1 per cent per day) via the faecal route. Based on
the protective effect of microsomal enzyme inducers, it is evident that the liver plays a
large role in the detoxification of microcystins (Brooks and Codd, 1987). Time-dependent
appearance and disappearance of additional chromatograph peaks, thought to represent
detoxification products, were seen in urine, faeces and liver cytosol fractions (Robinson
et al., 1991). Three metabolic products have since been identified, a glutathione
conjugate, a cysteine conjugate and a conjugate with the oxidised ADDA diene (Kondo
et al., 1996).
Microcystin-LR does not readily cross cell membranes, and hence does not enter most
tissues. After oral uptake it is transported across the ileum into the bloodstream through
a bile acid type transporter (the multispecific organic ion transport system) present in
hepatocytes and cells lining the small intestine (Runnegar et al., 1991; Falconer et al.,
1992) and is concentrated in the liver as a result of active uptake by hepatocytes
(Runnegar et al., 1981). It is covalently bound to a 40 kdalton protein (protein
phosphatase 2A and possibly protein phosphatase 1) in the hepatocyte cytosol (Holmes
et al., 1994; Bagu et al., 1997). Some other microcystin congeners are more hydro-
phobic than microcystin-LR and may cross cell membranes by other mechanisms,
including diffusion.
Acute and subacute toxicity
Microcystin-LR is highly toxic. The LD by the i.p. route ranges from 25 to 150 µg kg-1
50
body weight (bw) in mice (a value of 50 or 60 µg kg-1 bw is commonly accepted). The
oral LD (administered by gavage, i.e. dosing directly into the stomach through the
50
mouth) is 5,000 µg kg-1 bw in one strain of mice (Fawell et al., 1994), 10,900 µg kg-1 bw in
a different strain of mice (Yoshida et al., 1997), and higher in rats (Fawell et al., 1994).
This indicates that, even by the oral route, microcystin-LR displays acute toxicity in
rodents. There is no evidence of hydrolysis of microcystins by peptidases in the stomach
and it is apparent that a significant amount of microcystin-LR passes the intestinal
barrier and is absorbed. Similarly, the oral LD of Microcystis extracts in mice was 50- to
50
170-fold higher than the i.p. LD of the same extracts (Falconer, 1991; Kotak et al.,
50
1993).
The i.p. LD s of several of the commonly occurring microcystins (microcystin-LA, -YR,
50
and -YM) are similar to that of microcystin-LR, but the i.p. LD for microcystin-RR is
50
about tenfold higher (see Table 3.1).
However, because of differences in lipophilicity and polarity between the different
microcystins, it cannot be presumed that the i.p. LD will predict toxicity after oral
50
administration.
The microcystins are primarily hepatotoxins. After acute exposure by i.v. or i.p. injection
of microcystin, severe liver damage is characterised by a disruption of liver cell structure
(due to damage to the cytoskeleton), a loss of sinusoidal structure, increases in liver
weight due to intrahepatic haemorrhage, haemodynamic shock, heart failure and death.
Other organs affected are the kidneys and lungs (Hooser et al., 1990) and the intestines
(Falconer, 1994; Falconer and Humpage, 1996).
In a recent study, a single oral dose of microcystin-LR at 500 µg kg-1 bw was given to 5
and 32 week old mice, and liver pathology was examined 2-19 hours later. In 62 per cent
of the older mice, there was clear microscopic evidence of liver injury. Furthermore,
microcystin-LR and a metabolite were detected in the livers. On the contrary, none of the
young mice developed liver injury. In untreated control mice, an examination of gastric
mucosa and small intestine revealed age-related disruption of surface cell structure. The
authors suggested that this disruption may markedly influence gastro-intestinal
absorption of microcystin-LR and hence explain the observed age-dependent liver
toxicity in exposed mice (Ito et al., 1997a).
Intranasal installation of microcystin-LR in mice resulted in extensive necrosis of the
epithelium of the nasal mucosa of both the olfactory and respiratory zones, progressing
to destruction of large areas of tissue down to levels of deep blood vessels (Fitzgeorge
et al., 1994). The LD by this route of administration was the same as the i.p. LD , and
50 50
dose-dependent liver lesions were observed. The same authors also demonstrated
cumulative liver damage after repeated dosing. While a single dose of 31.3 µg kg-1 bw
did not result in an increase in liver weight, repeated daily administration over a period of
seven days caused a 75 per cent increase in liver weight, which was almost as high as
the effect of a single intranasal dose of 500 µg kg-1 bw.
Repeated oral administration
Pure microcystin-LR. For assessing possible chronic human health effects, studies
involving repeated oral administration of pure microcystins at various dose levels are
most desirable. In a 13-week gavage study in mice, conducted under good laboratory
practice (GLP), pure microcystin-LR was administered orally to groups of 15 male and
female mice at 0, 40, 200, or 1,000 µg kg-1 bw per day for 13 weeks (Fawell et al., 1994).
The NOAEL was 40 µg kg-1 bw per day. At the next highest dose level there were slight
liver tissue changes in some male and female mice. At the highest dose level, all male
and most female mice showed liver changes, including chronic inflammation, focal
degeneration of hepatocytes and haemosiderin deposits. In male mice at the two highest
dose levels, serum transaminases were significantly elevated, serum gamma glutamyl
transferase was significantly reduced, and there were small but significant reductions in
total serum protein and serum albumin. In female mice, at the highest dose level, only
the changes in transaminases were observed (Fawell et al., 1994).
Microcystis extract. In an oral dosing study, Microcystis aeruginosa extract was supplied
to mice at five concentrations (equivalent to 750 to 12,000 µg kg-1 bw per day of
microcystin-YM) in their drinking water for up to one year. At the higher concentrations
there was increased death, increased bronchopneumonia (which was endemic in the
colony), and chronic liver injury. There was no evidence of tumourigenic changes in the
liver, despite the liver injury caused by chronic oral exposure to microcystins. No clear
NOAEL was established (Falconer et al., 1988).
In another study in pigs, Microcystis aeruginosa extract was given to groups of five pigs
in their drinking water for 44 days at dose levels calculated from potency estimates using
the mouse i.p. bioassay to be equivalent to 280, 800 or 1,310 µg kg-1 bw per day of
microcystins (assuming an average i.p. LD for microcystins of 100 µg kg-1 bw). The
50
extract contained at least seven microcystin variants, with microcystin-YR tentatively
identified by high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) as the major constituent. A
LOAEL of 280 µg kg-1 bw per day of toxins was identified, with general liver injury
(evident from histopathology and changes in serum enzymes) observed at the two
higher dose levels. At the lowest dose level, one pig was affected. The authors
determined the potency of their extract by the mouse i.p. LD bioassay, by HPLC
50
analysis and by the in vitro phosphatase inhibition assay (Falconer et al., 1994).
Summation of the peak areas from the HPLC identification of microcystin variants,
standardised against microcystin-LR (see Chapter 5), indicated that the LOAEL equated
with 100 µg microcystin-LR equivalents per kg bw per day.
Developmental effects
In an investigation on the effects of microcystin-LR on embryonic and foetal
development of the mouse, groups of 26 time-mated female mice were dosed once daily
by gavage with aqueous solutions of pure microcystin-LR from days 6 to 15 of
pregnancy, at dose levels of 0, 200, 600, or 2,000 µg kg-1 bw per day. Maternal clinical
signs, body weights and food consumption were recorded. Only treatment at 2,000 µg
kg-1 bw per day was associated with maternal toxicity and mortality. Seven of the 26
females died and two were sacrificed because of distress during the dosing period. On
day 18 of pregnancy the remaining females were killed. At the highest dose level, there
was a retardation of foetal weight and skeletal ossification, but no foetal deaths. Apart
from this there was no effect of microcystin-LR on sex ratio, implantation, post-
implantation loss, or on external or visceral or skeletal abnormalities. The NOAEL for
any aspect of developmental toxicity was 600 µg kg-1 bw per day (Fawell et al., 1994).
In a scoping study, eight 20-week old male and female mice which had received an
extract of Microcystis aeruginosa in their drinking water since weaning were mated;
extract exposure continued throughout pregnancy. Examination of litters showed no
effects on weight, number or sex ratio of offspring, compared with control litters.
However, there was some evidence of hippocampal injury and reduced brain size in 7
out of 73 of the five-day old young from parents who had received the Microcystis extract,
and in none of the controls (Falconer et al., 1988).
Carcinogenicity
Microcystin administered alone. In a recent study, microcystin-LR, administered i.p. to
mice, induced neoplastic liver nodules. Animals were given the toxin at 20 µg kg-1 bw,
100 times over 28 weeks. At autopsy, nodules up to 5 mm in diameter were observed in
the livers of all exposed mice. Some mice were kept a further two months after cessation
of dosing, and autopsy showed that liver nodules persisted (Ito et al., 1997b). In the
same study, mice orally administered microcystin-LR, at a dose level of 80 µg kg-1 bw,
100 times over the same time period showed no evidence of liver injury or nodule
formation. Previous work had shown that microcystin-LR given 20 times i.p. to mice, at
25 µg kg-1 bw, over 10 weeks did not induce liver nodules (Ohta et al., 1994).
Microcystin interaction with tumour initiators. It is generally understood that some
chemicals (usually DNA-damaging) can initiate the cancer process while other classes of
chemicals are able to promote the appearance of cancer after initiation has occurred
(Boutwell, 1974; Yamasaki, 1988; Fitzgerald and Yamasaki, 1990). Microcystins have
been tested for tumour promoting activity.
In vivo animal experiments. There has been some evidence of tumour promotion in
animal studies (see also section on mechanism of action). In a modified, two-stage
carcinogenesis mouse skin bioassay, a single dose of 7,12-dimethyl benzanthracene
(DMBA, 500 µg) was applied to the dorsal skin of groups of 20, three-month old, female
mice. After one week, groups of treated and control mice received either water alone,
water with Microcystis extract (80 mg microcystin-YM per litre; equivalent to 50 mg
microcystin-LR per litre), or croton oil (as a tumour-promoting phorbol ester-containing
positive control) applied to the skin (0.5 per cent in 0.1 ml acetone twice a week). At 52
days after DMBA exposure, there was a 1.6-fold increase in the number and a sevenfold
increase in the mean weight of skin papillomas (a type of benign tumour) per mouse in
animals given the cyanobacterial extract compared with those given water alone. It was
concluded by the authors that oral consumption of Microcystis extract from drinking
water may act directly or indirectly as a tumour promoter (Falconer, 1991). The
mechanism of action is not clear because microcystin-LR, at least, has difficulty
penetrating epidermal cells (Matsushima et al., 1990). In this study, there was
considerable liver damage, which could affect the interpretation of these findings
(Falconer, 1991). In a short-term two-stage carcinogenicity bioassay, groups of 10-19
seven-week old male F344 rats were initiated by i.p. injection with 200 mg kg-1 bw
diethylnitrosamine (DEN), followed by partial hepatectomy (performed to stimulate cell
division and thus increase the sensitivity of the assay). In two separate experiments,
twice-weekly i.p. doses of 1 and 10 µg kg-1 microcystin-LR and of 10,25 and 50 µg kg-1
microcystin-LR were then administered during eight weeks and this resulted in a dose-
dependent increase in the number (up to threefold) and area (up to 11-fold) of GST-P-
positive liver foci (GST-P is the placental form of glutathione-S transferase, a biomarker
for preneoplastic changes in liver (Sato et al., 1984)). The i.p. NOAEL in this study was 1
µg kg-1 (Nishiwaki-Matsushima et al., 1992). Microcystin-LR given without DEN initiation
showed no induction of liver foci. Macroscopic nodules, histologically diagnosed as
neoplastic nodules, were seen in this study when DEN was followed by microcystin-LR
at 10 µg kg-1 (before) and 50 µg kg-1 (after) partial hepatectomy (Nishiwaki-Matsushima et
al., 1992).
In another tumour initiation and promotion assay aimed at evaluating possible tumour
promoting effects in the upper small intestine, two doses of 40 mg kg-1 bw of the initiator
N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU) were orally administered to C57 black mice, one week
apart, followed by drinking water containing various levels of Microcystis extracts,
estimated to be equivalent to 0, 1.2 or 4.2 mg kg-1 bw per day of microcystins for up to 22
weeks. Time to 50 per cent survival was about 17 weeks in controls and 15 weeks in
extract-exposed mice. No primary liver tumours were seen in any group and there was
no evidence of microcystin-induced promotion of lymphoid or duodenal tumours
(Falconer and Humpage, 1996).
In vitro studies on interaction of microcystins and tumour initiators are discussed in the
section on in vitro studies below.
Genotoxicity
No mutagenic response has been observed for purified toxins (exact nature not
determined) derived from Microcystis in the Ames Salmonella assay (strains TA98,
TA100 and TA102) with or without S9 activation. The Bacillus subtilis multigene
sporulation test was also negative with regard to mutagenicity using both the 168 and
hcr-9 strains (Repavich et al., 1990). An earlier study with purified Microcystis extract
also elicited a negative response in the Ames test (Runnegar and Falconer, 1982).
The purified toxins from a Microcystis species tested against human lymphocytes
suggested that the toxins may be clastogenic as indicated by dose-related increases in
chromosomal breakage (Repavich et al., 1990).
In vitro studies
Extracts from Microcystis aeruginosa blooms containing mainly microcystins (no
analytical data presented) from a lake in China were tested in a two-stage cell-
transformation assay using Syrian hamster embryo (SHE) cells. In this assay, the
microcystin extract had no initiating activity when followed by the tumour promoter TPA
(12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol 13-acetate). With methylcholanthrene as the initiator (0.5
µg ml-1), followed by bloom extract, a dose-related (up to sevenfold) increase in
transformation frequency was observed (Wang and Zhu, 1996).
Primary hepatocyte cultures in the presence of picomolar and nanomolar concentrations
of microcystin-LR showed selective cell toxicity and selective cell proliferation depending
on the ploidy (chromosome copy number) of the cells (Humpage and Falconer, 1999).
Mechanism of action
Microcystin-LR was found to be a potent inhibitor of eukaryotic protein serine/threonine
phosphatases 1 and 2A both in vitro (Honkanen et al., 1990; MacKintosh et al., 1990)
and in vivo (Runnegar et al., 1993), and this effect has become the basis of one of the
bioassays to detect its presence. Substances that inhibit these protein phosphatases are
considered to be non-phorbol ester (TPA)-type tumour promoters. Other substances that
act in a similar way to microcystins are okadaic acid, nodularin, tautomycin and calyculin
(for a review see Fujiki and Suganuma, 1993). The protein phosphatases serve an
important regulatory role to maintain homeostasis in the cell (Cohen, 1989). Protein
phosphatase inhibition results in a shift in the balance towards higher phosphorylation of
target proteins, such as tumour suppresser proteins. This is a major post-translational
modification which can result in excessive signalling and may lead towards cell
proliferation, cell transformation and tumour promotion (Fujiki and Suganuma, 1993). In
liver cells, intermediate filaments of the cytoskeleton are hyperphosphorylated leading to
cellular disruption (Falconer and Yeung, 1992). In monolayer cell cultures this leads to
detachment from adjacent cells, and involves actin filament contraction (Hooser et al.,
1991, Ghosh et al., 1995). The inhibition of protein phosphatase 2A by microcystin-LR
can be effectively reversed in the presence of polyclonal antibodies against microcystin-
LR (Lin and Chu, 1994b); such antibodies can also protect in vivo against microcystin-
LR toxicity as shown with i.p. co-administration studies in mice (Nagata et al., 1995).
The implications of protein phosphatase inhibition in humans, due to low level chronic
exposure to microcystins, are not known.
Additional study requirements
Further short-term studies are needed to understand better the genotoxic and tumour
promoting potential of microcystins. Such studies would also be useful as a preliminary
to the design of appropriate chronic or other in vivo studies to assess their carcinogenic
potential. Regarding the possible role of microcystins in tumour promotion, further
studies are especially needed to establish a dose-effect relationship for nodule induction
with microcystin alone using various routes of administration.
Derivation of a tolerable daily intake (TDI)
Most of the relevant data on microcystin toxicity have come from either reported human
injury related to consumption of drinking water containing cyanobacteria (see section 4.2)
or from limited work with experimental animals (see above). Although the cyanotoxins
have not been reviewed by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC),
their standard evaluation procedures (IARC, 1995) lead to the conclusion that, at present,
the human evidence for microcystin carcinogenicity is inadequate and the animal
evidence is limited. In such instances, the current practice for deriving a TDI is to use a
LOAEL or NOAEL divided by appropriate safety or uncertainty factors as described in
the Addendum to the Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality (WHO, 1998).
A 13-week mouse oral (by gavage) study with pure microcystin-LR has been considered
the most suitable for the derivation of a guideline value for microcystin-LR. In a study by
Fawell et al. (1994) a NOAEL of 40 µg kg-1 bw per day was determined, based on liver
histopathology and serum enzyme level changes. By applying a total uncertainty factor
of 1,000 (10 for intra-species variability, 10 for inter-species variability and 10 for
limitations in the database, in particular a lack of data on chronic toxicity and
carcinogenicity), a provisional TDI of 0.04 µg kg-1 bw per day has been determined for
microcystin-LR. This TDI is supported by the results of a 44-day pig study, in which pigs
were given Microcystis extract in their drinking water, resulting in a LOAEL of 100 µg
microcystin-LR equivalents per kg bw per day (Falconer et al., 1994; see above). To this
LOAEL an overall uncertainty factor of 1,500 was applied, arrived at by using 10 for
intra-species variability, 3 rather than 10 for inter-species variability (because pigs
physiologically resemble humans more closely than rodents), 5 for extrapolating from a
LOAEL to a NOAEL (10 was considered inappropriate due to the low incidence of effects
in the lowest dose group and the deduced shape of the dose-response curve) and 10 for
the less-than-lifetime exposure. This resulted in a provisional TDI of 0.067 µg kg-1 bw per
day. The lower of these two values, 0.04 µg kg-1 bw per day, has been used in deriving a
provisional guideline value (see Chapter 5).
4.2.2 Nodularin
Compared with Microcystis and microcystins, there have been fewer reported incidents
of human and livestock disease involving Nodularia spp. and nodularin (see section 4.1).
Experimental animal data
The toxicity and liver pathology induced by nodularin is similar to that caused by
microcystins, with hepatocyte necrosis and haemorrhagic diathesis (Runnegar et al.,
1988). Nodularin inhibits protein phosphatases 1 and 2A with the same potency as
microcystin-LR (Yoshizawa et al., 1990). In a two-stage liver carcinogenesis experiment
in male F344 rats initiated with DEN and without partial hepatectomy, repeated i.p.
administration of 10 µg nodularin per kg bw induced GST-P-positive foci more effectively
than microcystin-LR. Nodularin alone also induced some foci. In addition, nodularin was
capable of activating several proto-oncogenes of the fos and jun family, which are
considered to play a role in tumour promotion (Ohta et al., 1994).
Derivation of a tolerable daily intake
There are no studies available that use oral administration of nodularin, thus a TDI
cannot be set. Nevertheless, several experimental studies cited above indicate that
nodularin has similar toxicity to microcystin-LR. It may be appropriate, therefore, to
consider nodularin in an analogous fashion to microcystins in terms of human health risk
assessment.
4.2.3 Anatoxin-a
The potent neurotoxin, anatoxin-a, from Anabaena flos-aquae has frequently been
involved in animal and wildfowl poisoning (Ressom et al., 1994) (Table 4.1).
Experimental studies
Anatoxin-a is a nicotinic (cholinergic) agonist that binds to neuronal nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors. It has been suggested that the activation of presynaptic nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors by anatoxin-a results in an influx of Na+, producing sufficient local
depolarisation to open voltage sensitive Ca++ and Na+ channels. The latter may then
amplify the response, activating further Ca++ channels (Soliakov et al., 1995). As a result
of this depolarisation there is a block of further electrical transmission, and at sufficiently
high doses this can lead to paralysis, asphyxiation and death (Carmichael et al., 1975;
Carmichael, 1997). Anatoxin-a is more potent than nicotine or acetylcholine in evoking
type 1A or type 2 current responses in rat hippocampal neurones (Alkondon and
Albuquerque, 1995), and it is more potent than nicotine in its ability to evoke the
secretion of endogenous catecholamines from bovine adrenal chromaffin cells through
their neuronal-type nicotinic receptors (Molloy et al., 1995). Similar to nicotine, anatoxin-
a was more potent than noradrenaline in releasing dopamine from striatal nerve
terminals from rat superfused hippocampal synaptosomes (Clarke and Reuben, 1996).
In vivo studies in the rat showed that the toxin stimulates the sympathetic system
through the release of catecholamines from nerve endings (Dube et al., 1996).
Acute toxicity
In mice, the i.p. LD (lowest dose causing death) of anatoxin-a was 250 µg kg-1 bw
10
(Stevens and Krieger, 1989) and the i.p. LD of anatoxin-a is 375 µg kg-1 bw (Fitzgeorge
50
et al., 1994). The i.v. LD is less than 100 µg kg-1 bw (Fawell and James, 1994). The oral
50
LD for anatoxin-a is greater than 5,000 µg kg-1 bw, and the intranasal LD in mice is
50 50
2,000 µg kg-1 bw (Fitzgeorge et al., 1994).
Subacute toxicity
In two studies, anatoxin-a was administered to rats orally in the drinking water for 54
days at 0.51 or 5.1 ppm (equivalent to 51 and 510 µg kg-1 bw per day, respectively) or by
i.p. injection at 16 µg per rat per day for 21 days (equivalent to 80 µg kg-1 bw per day;
Astrachan et al., 1980). No toxicity was observed (no deaths due to treatment; no
significant changes in body weight gain, haematology or clinical chemistry).
In a dose range-finding study for a four-week oral toxicity experiment, groups of 2 male
and 2 female mice were administered anatoxin-a hydro-chloride by gavage at dose
levels of 1,500, 7,500 or 15,000 µg kg-1 per day for five days. All mice at the highest dose,
and one female at the intermediate dose, died within three minutes of their first dose.
Males at the intermediate dose were hyperactive after their third dose. All other animals
survived, and no treatment-related signs of clinical toxicity, or changes in body weight
were observed. No treatment-related changes were observed at necropsy (Fawell and
James, 1994).
In a 4-week study, groups of 10 male and female mice were administered anatoxin-a
hydrochloride by gavage at dose levels of 0, 120, 600 or 3,000 µg kg-1 bw. In the course
of the experiment, one male receiving 600 µg kg-1 bw per day and one female receiving
3,000 µg kg-1 per day died. No signs of clinical toxicity or histopathological abnormalities
were observed in these two animals, and no cause of death could be identified. It was
concluded by the authors that the possibility that these deaths were treatment-related
could not be excluded, although this was considered to be unlikely. There were no other
treatment-related findings. Although the NOAEL for anatoxin-a hydro-chloride in this
study was determined to be 120 µg kg-1 bw per day, equivalent to 100 µg kg-1 bw per day
of anatoxin-a, the toxicological database was considered to be inadequate to use these
results for setting a formal TDI.
Reproductive effects
Doses of 200 or 125 µg kg-1 bw anatoxin-a were given i.p. to hamsters one or three times
per day, respectively, at days 12 to 14 of pregnancy (after organo-genesis), and the
dams were sacrificed at day 15. The treatment given three times per day caused foetal
malformation (hydrocephaly) in all foetuses in one of 10 litters, and stunted growth in
almost all litters; treatment given once per day resulted in stunted growth. No maternal
toxicity was observed (Astrachan et al., 1980).
Groups of 10 and 12 time-mated female mice were given anatoxin-a hydrochloride by
gavage at 0 or 3,000 µg kg-1 bw per day (equivalent to 2,460 µg kg-1 bw per day anatoxin-
a) respectively, on days 6 to 15 of pregnancy. The anatoxin-a dose was considered the
maximum dose that could be tolerated. No treatment-related effects were observed in
the dams or offspring, although there was a slight decrease in foetal weight compared
with controls (Fawell and James, 1994). No data on the genotoxic potential of anatoxin-a
are available.
Derivation of a tolerable daily intake
Anatoxin-a is a potent acute neurotoxin. The available data indicate that significant
concern with regard to chronic toxicity (Fawell and James, 1994) is unlikely, but the data
base is insufficient for derivation of a TDI.
4.2.4 Homoanatoxin-a
Homoanatoxin-a is a potent neuromuscular blocking agent with an i.p. LD in mice of
50
250 µg kg-1 bw. Toxicosis in the lethal dose range leads to severe body paralysis,
convulsions and death by respiratory arrest in 7-12 minutes. Experiments with rat
phrenic nerve hemidiaphragm preparations demonstrated that the physiological effects
of homoanatoxin-a are related to those observed for d-tubocurarine (Skulberg et al.
1992). Recent studies have shown that homoanatoxin-a enhances the influx of Ca++ ions
in the cholinergic nerve terminals (Aas et al., 1996). No TDI can be derived.
4.2.5 Anatoxin-a(S)
Anatoxin-a(S) is an organophosphate produced by the cyanobacteria Anabaena flos-
aquae and A. lemmermannii (see Chapter 3). This toxin blocks acetylcholinesterase
activity in a manner analogous to organophosphate insecticides. The i.p. LD in mice is
50
20 µg kg-1 bw with muscle weakness, respiratory distress (dyspnea) and convulsions
(effect on seizure threshold) preceding death (Mahmood and Carmichael, 1986a;
Matsunaga et al. 1989). There are no oral toxicity studies for this toxin.
Derivation of a tolerable daily intake
A lack of adequate experimental data or human data precludes the derivation of a TDI.
4.2.6 Saxitoxins
Effects in humans
Saxitoxin and some of its analogues are produced by Anabaena circinalis in Australian
freshwaters and Aphanizomenon flos-aquae in the USA (Sawyer et al., 1968; Mahmood
and Carmichael, 1986b; Humpage et al., 1994). The saxitoxin group has been the cause
of paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP) in people. Several species of dinoflagellates
produce PSP toxins that accumulate in molluscs which filter-feed on these organisms.
People who have consumed shellfish containing high levels of PSP toxins may suffer
from this acute illness. The signs and symptoms of PSP in humans may range from a
slight tingling and numbness about the lips to complete paralysis and death from
respiratory failure (Meyer et al., 1928; Medcof et al., 1947; McFarren et al., 1958). More
than 1,000 cases of PSP have been reported since the early 1900s in North and Central
America and there have been 109 deaths. In a recent epidemic in Guatemala, the
mortality rate in children was 50 per cent, while for adults it was 5 per cent (Rodrigue et
al. 1990; for a review see Kao, 1993). No PSP-like illnesses have been reported in
humans from the consumption of drinking water containing saxitoxins, although there
have been fatalities in sheep after ingesting a PSP toxin-containing bloom of A. circinalis
(Negri et al., 1995).
Experimental studies
Mode of action. Of the various PSP toxins, only saxitoxin has been studied in detail for
pharmacological effects, partly because the other toxins are usually not available in
sufficient quantities for such studies. Nearly all the systemic actions of saxitoxin can be
explained by its pharmacological effect on nerve axon membranes. This involves a wide
spread blockage of sodium ion channels of the excitable membranes of nerves, thereby
affecting (partially or completely, depending on dose) impulse generation in peripheral
nerves and skeletal muscles (Catterall, 1980). This results in generalised nerve
dysfunction as measured by electromyography (Easthaugh and Shepherd, 1989). In
mammals, these effects lead to paralysis, respiratory depression and respiratory failure.
Direct cardiac effects are usually minimal (see review by Kao, 1993).
Metabolism. No data are available on PSP toxin absorption, distribution, metabolism and
excretion.
Table 4.2 LD values following a single dose of PSP toxin extract in the mouse in
50
relation to the route of administration
Route of administration LD 1 (µg PSP kg-1 body weight)
50
Male Female
Intravenous 3.4 (3.2-3.6)
Intraperitoneal 10.0 (9.7-10.5) 8.0 (7.6-8.6)
Oral 263.0 (251-267)
PSP Paralytic shellfish poison
Source: IPCS, 1984; adapted from Wiberg and Stephenson, 1960
1 The 95% confidence limits are given in parentheses
Acute toxicity
The principle of the standardised mouse bioassay developed by Sommer and Meyer
(1937) is measurement of time to death after i.p. injection. In that study, the authors
suggested that signs characteristic of PSP, such as dyspnea, could be observed after
the i.p. administration of toxin. Hypotensive effects have been observed to accompany
the respiratory depression, implicating both central and peripheral nervous system
actions (Watts et al., 1966).
Acute toxicity studies have been conducted in several species with extracts containing
PSP toxins obtained from the Alaskan butter clam (Genenah and Shimizu, 1981). Using
this preparation, Wiberg and Stephenson (1960) determined the LD values for male
50
mice, using three routes of administration (i.v., i.p. and oral). In addition, the i.p. LD
50
was determined in female mice (Table 4.2). The PSP toxin extract was much less toxic
when administered by the oral route than by the i.v. or i.p. routes (Table 4.2). Increasing
the pH of the injection medium (> 3.8) or the addition of sodium ions affected i.p. toxicity,
while the addition of sodium ions did not influence oral or i.v. toxicity. Similar
comparative LD s for different routes of administration were obtained in rats; in addition
50
new-born rats were about tenfold more susceptible than adults after oral administration
(Watts et al., 1966) (Table 4.3). For a number of animal species tested, the oral LD for
50
PSP toxin ranged from 128 µg kg-1 bw PSP toxin in guinea pigs to 420 µg kg-1 bw in mice
(IPCS, 1984).
Table 4.3 LD values following oral or intraperitoneal administration of a single dose of
50
PSP toxin extract to rats of different ages
Age LD 1 (µg PSP kg-1 body weight)
50
Oral Intraperitoneal
New-born (24 hours) 64 (51-80) 5.5 (4.7-6.5)
Weanling (21 days) 270 (204-356) 8.3 (7.7-9.0)
Adult (60-70 days) 531 (490-576) 10.0 (8.5-11.8)
1 The 95% confidence limits are given in parentheses
Source: IPCS, 1984; adapted from Watts et al., 1966
Prior exposure to non-lethal doses of PSP toxin seems to lower the susceptibility of rats
to lethal doses of PSP toxin. In a study using Sprague-Dawley rats (sex not indicated),
the oral LD value for the purified PSP extract was determined (McFarren et al., 1958).
50
One group of rats was given a non-lethal dose of PSP toxin (about one-third of the LD )
50
14 days before the test. The LD for the pre-treated rats was about 50 per cent higher
50
than that for untreated rats. This finding corroborates the fact noted by Prakash et al.
(1971) that fishermen who habitually eat shellfish containing low levels of PSP toxins
appear to be less susceptible to developing PSP.
There is a wide range in i.p. toxicity of the various PSP toxins (i.e. saxitoxin,
neosaxitoxin, the gonyautoxins and C toxins) as tested following the Association of
Official Analytical Chemists (AOAC) mouse bioassay (AOAC, 1984). Potencies of these
toxins are usually expressed in mouse units (MU) per µmol of toxin. Saxitoxin is one of
the most toxic of the PSP toxins (2,483 MU per µmol) and the C toxins are the least toxic
(15-143 MU per µmol) (Oshima, 1995). Potencies may also be expressed as saxitoxin
equivalents. Inter-conversions during storage, cooking or digestion may modify the i.p.
and oral toxicity (Humpage et al., 1994; see also section 3.4.2). No subchronic or
chronic animal studies with PSP toxins are available.
Derivation of a tolerable daily intake
The animal toxicity data for the saxitoxins are inadequate to set a TDI.
4.2.7 Cylindrospermopsin
This cyanotoxin was initially isolated from a culture of Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii
obtained from a water supply reservoir in tropical northern Australia. The organism was
identified as a result of an outbreak of acute hepato-enteritis and renal damage among
an Aboriginal population on Palm Island, off the coast of North Queensland (Hawkins et
al., 1985) (see Box 4.2). Intraperitoneal injection of the lysed organism to mice resulted
in widespread and progressive tissue injury, with cell necrosis in the liver, kidneys,
adrenals, lung, heart, spleen and thymus (Hawkins et al., 1985, 1997). In mice, the i.p.
LD at 24 hours was 52 mg dry weight (dw) of cells per kg bw, equivalent to 300 µg kg-1
50
bw of cylindrospermopsin, whereas the i.p. LD at seven days was approximately 32 mg
50
cells per kg bw, equivalent to 180 µg kg-1 bw of toxin (Hawkins et al., 1997).
Administration of the pure toxin to mice showed this delayed toxicity more clearly, with
the 24-hour i.p. LD being 2,100 µg kg-1 bw and the 5-6 day i.p. LD being 200 µg kg-1
50 50
bw (Ohtani et al., 1992). In vitro studies with pure cylindrospermopsin have shown that it
inhibits glutathione synthesis and protein synthesis in general (Runnegar et al., 1994,
1995; Terao et al., 1994). In mouse liver after i.p. administration, major changes were
seen in hepatocytes, with progressive proliferation of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum
and accumulation of lipid over five days (Terao et al., 1994). No data on the oral toxicity
of pure cylindrospermopsin are available, but studies with aqueous extracts of
Cylindrospermopsis provide a preliminary indication. After administering to mice a single
oral dose of an aqueous extract of freeze-dried Cylindrospermopsis cells, a median
lethal dose in the range of 4.4 to 6.9 mg kg-1 toxin equivalent was determined (Seawright
et al., 1999). Because the i.p. LD is 0.2 mg kg-1 and the LD is likely to be double that,
50 100
the oral toxicity appears to be over tenfold lower than i.p. toxicity.
At present it is not known if cylindrospermopsin is the only toxin in Cylindrospermopsis,
because the major kidney damage seen on i.p. dosing of some toxic extracts is not
similarly observed after administration of pure toxin.
Derivation of a tolerable daily intake
On the basis of present data it is not possible to derive a TDI.
4.2.8 Other cyanotoxins produced by marine cyanobacteria
Swimmers off Hawaii and Okinawa who have come into contact with the marine
cyanobacterium Lyngbya majuscula have contracted acute dermatitis, causing
"swimmers' itch" (Moikeha and Chu, 1971; Hashimoto et al., 1976). The effect is a
cutaneous inflammation with signs of erythema, blisters and desquamation within 12
hours of exposure to the cyanobacterium. The inflammatory activity of Lyngbya is
caused by aplysiatoxins and debromoaplysiatoxin (Mynderse et al., 1977). These toxins
are potent animal skin tumour promoters and protein kinase C activators (Fujiki et al.,
1990). Aplysiatoxins are toxic to mice at a minimum lethal dose of about 0.3 mg kg-1
(Moore, 1977). Debromoaplysiatoxin, along with other toxic compounds, has also been
isolated from other Oscillatoriaceae such as Schizothrix calcicola and Oscillatoria
nigroviridis. The chemically different lyngbyatoxin-a (Cardellina et al., 1979), found in
another shallow water strain of marine Lyngbya majuscula, has caused dermatitis and
severe oral and gastrointestinal inflammation (Moore et al., 1993). Its toxicity to mouse
corresponds to aplysiatoxins (Moore, 1977) and it has skin tumour promoting activity
similar to the well known tumour promoter, TPA (Fujiki et al., 1981, 1984). Lyngbya
majuscula sometimes grows epiphytically on edible algae, such as Acanthophora
spicifera which is eaten in Indonesia and in the Philippines. Cyanobacteria have also
been suspected to be a source of toxins in the ciguatera food chain that may lead to
human poisoning (Hahn and Capra, 1992; Endean et al., 1993).
4.2.9 Cyanobacterial lipopolysaccharides
Lipopolysaccharides, cell wall components of gram-negative bacteria, are pyrogenic
(fever-causing agents) and toxic (Weckesser and Drews, 1979). In Sewickley,
Pennsylvania, an outbreak of gastro-enteritis is suspected to have been caused by
cyanobacterial LPS (Lippy and Erb, 1976; Keleti et al., 1979). The few studies carried
out on cyanobacterial LPS indicate that they are less toxic than the LPS of other bacteria
such as Salmonella (Keleti and Sykora, 1982; Raziuddin et al., 1983). Lack of axenic
cyanobacterial strains has previously hindered detailed studies on structures and
toxicities of cyanobacterial LPS.
4.2.10 Other bioactive compounds in cyanobacteria
Cyanobacteria produce a wide variety of bioactive compounds in addition to the
cyanotoxins described in this chapter. They include anti-tumour (cytotoxic), anti-viral,
and anti-fungal compounds, antibiotics and protease inhibitors (Moore et al., 1996;
Namikoshi and Rinehart, 1996). Further screening of these biomedically interesting
compounds is underway and is likely to lead to the discovery of many new compounds in
the future, some of which may be toxic. Bioassays of cyanobacterial cell extracts have
often revealed a higher toxicity than expected from the content of known toxins in the
extract.
4.3 References
Aas, P., Eriksen, S., Kolderup, J., Lundy, P., Haugen, J-E., Skulberg, O.M., Fonnum, F.
1996 Enhancement of acetylcholine release by homoanatoxin-a from Oscillatoria
formosa. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol., 2, 223-232.
Alkondon, M. and Albuquerque, E. X. 1995 Diversity of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
in rat hippocampal neurons. III. Agonist actions of the novel alkaloid epibatidine and
analysis of type II current. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther., 274(2), 771-782.
AOAC 1984 Official Methods of Analysis. S. Williams [Ed.] Association of Official
Analytical Chemists, Arlington, VA.
Astrachan, N.B., Archer, B.G. and Hilbelink, D.R. 1980 Evaluation of the sub-acute
toxicity and teratogenicity of anatoxin-a. Toxicon, 18, 684-688.
Bagu, J.R., Sykes, B., Craig, M., Holmes, C.F.B. 1997 A molecular basis for different
interactions of marine toxins with protein phosphatase 1. J. Biol. Chem., 272, 5087-5097.
Botes, D.P., Wessels, P.L., Kruger, H., Runnegar, M.T.C., Santikarn, S., Smith, R.J.,
Barna, J.C.J. and Williams, D.H. 1985 Structural studies on cyanoginosins-LR, -YR, -YA,
and -YM, peptide toxins of Microcystis aeruginosa. J. Chem. Society Perkin Trans., 1,
2747-2748.
Boutwell, R.K. 1974 The function and mechanism of promoters in carcinogenesis. CRC
Crit. Rev. Toxicol., 2, 419-443.
Bourke, A.T.C., Hawes, R.B., Neilson, A. and Stallman, N.D. 1983 An outbreak of
hepato-enteritis (the Palm Island Mystery Disease) possibly caused by algal intoxication.
Toxicon, 3, Supplement, 45-48.
Brooks, W.P. and Codd, G.A. 1987 Distribution of Microcystis aeruginosa peptide toxin
and interactions with hepatic microsomes in mice. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 60(3), 187-191.
Bury, N.R., Eddy, F.B. and Codd, G.A. 1995 The effects of the cyanobacterium
Microcystis aeruginosa, the cyanobacterial hepatotoxin microcystin-LR, and ammonia on
growth rate and ionic regulation of brown trout. J. Fish Biol., 46(6), 1042-1054.
Byth, S. 1980 Palm Island mystery disease. Med. J. Aust., 2, 40-42.
Carbis, C.R., Waldron, D.L., Mitchell, G.F., Anderson J.W. and McCauley, I. 1995
Recovery of hepatic function and latent mortalities in sheep exposed to the blue-green
alga Microcystis aeruginosa. Vet. Rec., 137(1), 12-15.
Cardellina, II J.H., Marner, F.J. and Moore, R.E. 1979 Seaweed dermatitis: structure of
lyngbyatoxin A. Science, 204, 193-195.
Carmichael, W. 1997 The cyanotoxins. Adv. Botan. Res., 27, 211-256.
Carmichael, W.W. 1992 A Status Report on Planktonic Cyanobacteria (Blue Green
Algae) and their Toxins. EPA/600/R-92/079, Environmental Monitoring Systems
Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, US Environmental Protection Agency,
Cincinnati, Ohio.
Carmichael, W. and Gorham, P. 1978 Anatoxins from clones of Anabaena flos-aquae
isolated from lakes of Western Canada. Mitt. Int. Ver. Limnol, 21, 285-295.
Carmichael, W.W., Biggs, D. and German, P. 1975 Toxicology and pharmacological
action of Anabaena flos-aquae toxin. Science, 187, 542-544.
Catterall, W. 1980 Neurotoxins that act on voltage-sensitive sodium channels in
excitable membranes. Ann. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 20, 15-43.
Clarke, P.B.S. and Reuben, M. 1996 Release of [3H]-noradrenaline from rat hippocampal
synaptosomes by nicotine: mediation by different nicotinic receptor subtypes from striatal
[3H]-dopamine release. Brit. J. Pharmacol., 117, 595-606.
Cohen, P. 1989 The structure and regulation of protein phosphatases. Ann. Rev.
Biochem. 58, 453-508.
Cohen, S.G. and Reif, C.B. 1953 Cutaneous sensitization to blue-green algae. J. Allergy.
24, 452-457.
Dillenberg, H.O. and Dehnel, M.K. 1960 Toxic water bloom in Saskatchewan 1959. Can.
Med. Assoc. J., 83, 1151-1154.
Dube, S.N., Mazumder, P.K., Kumar, D., Rao, P.V.L. and Bhaskar, A.S.B. 1996
Cardiorespiratory and neuromuscular effects of freshwater cyanophyte Anabena flos
aquae in rats. Def. Sci. J., 46(3), 135-141.
Easthaugh, J. and Shepherd, S. 1989 Infectious and toxic syndromes from fish and
shellfish consumption. Arch. Intern. Med., 149, 1735-1740.
Endean, R., Monks, S.A., Griffith, J K. and Llewellyn, L.E. 1993 Apparent relationship
between toxins elaborated by the cyanobacterium Trichodesmium erythraeum and those
present in the flesh of the narrow-barred Spanish mackerel Scomberomorus
commersoni. Toxicon., 31, 1155-1165.
Eriksson. J.E, Meriluoto, J. and Lindholm, T. 1986 Can cyanobacterial toxins accumulate
in aquatic food chains? In: Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium of Microbiol
Ecology, Ljubljana (Yugoslavia), 658-658.
Falconer, I.R. 1991 Tumor promotion and liver injury caused by oral consumption of
cyanobacteria. Environ. Toxicol. Water Qual., 6(2), 177-184.
Falconer, I.R. 1994 Health problems from exposure to cyanobacteria and proposed
guidelines for drinking and recreational water. In: G.A. Codd, T.M. Jefferies, C.W. Keevil
and E. Potter [Eds] Detection methods for Cyanobacterial Toxins. Royal Society of
Chemistry, Cambridge, 3-10.
Falconer, I.R. and Humpage, A.R. 1996 Tumour promotion by cyanobacterial toxins.
Phycologia, 35(6 supplement), 74-79.
Falconer, I.R. and Yeung, S.K. 1992 Cytoskeletal changes in hepatocytes induced by
Microcystis toxins and their relation to hyperphosphorylation of cell proteins. Chem. Biol.
Interact., 81, 181-196.
Falconer, I.R., Beresford, A.M. and Runnegar, M.T.C. 1983 Evidence of liver damage by
toxin from a bloom of the blue-green alga, Microcystis aeruginosa. Med. J. Aust., 1, 511-
514.
Falconer, I.R., Buckley, T. and Runnegar, M.T. 1986 Biological half-life, organ
distribution and excretion of 125-I-labelled toxic peptide from the blue-green algae
Microcystis aeruginosa. Aust. J. Biol. Sci., 39(1), 17-21.
Falconer, I.R., Burch, M.D., Steffensen, D.A., Choice, M. and Coverdale, O.R. 1994
Toxicity of the blue-green alga (cyanobacterium) Microcystis aeruginosa in drinking
water to growing pigs, as an animal model for human injury and risk assessment. J.
Environ. Toxicol. Water Qual. 9, 131-139.
Falconer, I.R., Choice, A. and Hosja, W. 1992 Toxicity of edible mussels (Mytilus edulis)
growing naturally in an estuary during a waterbloom of the blue-green alga Nodularia
spumigena. J. Environ. Toxicol. Water Qual. 7, 119-123.
Falconer, I.R, Hardy, S.J., Humpage, A.R., Froscio, S M., Tozer, G.J. and Hawkins, P.R.,
1999 Hepatic and renal toxicity of the blue-green alga (cyanobacterium)
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii in male Swiss Albino mice. J. Environ. Toxicol. Water
Qual., 14(1), In Press.
Falconer, I.R., Jackson A.R.B., Langley, J. and Runnegar, M. T. 1981 Liver pathology in
mice in poisoning by the blue-green alga Microcystis aeruginosa. Aust. J. Biol. Sci,. 34,
174-187.
Falconer, I.R., Smith, J.V., Jackson, A.R.B., Jones, A. and Runnegar, M.T.C. 1988 Oral
toxicity of abloom of the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa administered to mice
over periods up to 1 year. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health, 24, 291-305.
Fawell, J.K. 1993 Toxins from blue-green algae: toxicological assessment of
microcystin-LR Volume 4. Microcystin-LR: 13 week oral (gavage) toxicity study in the
mouse (final report), Water Research Centre, Medmenham, UK, 1-259.
Fawell, J.K. and James, H.A. 1994 Report No. FR 0434/DoE 3728. Alien House, The
Listons, Listen Road, Marlow, Bucks, SL7 1FD, UK.
Fawell, J.K., Hart, J., James, H.A. and Parr, W. 1993 Blue-green algae and their toxins-
analysis, toxicity, treatment and environmental control. Water Supply, 11(3/4), 109-121.
Fawell, J.K., James, C.P. and James, H.A. 1994 Toxins from Blue-Green Algae:
Toxicological Assessment of Microcystin-LR and a Method for its Determination in Water,
Water Research Centre, Medmenham, UK, 1-46.
Fitzgerald, D.J. and Yamasaki, H. 1990 Tumor promotion: models and assay systems.
Teratogen, Carcinogen. Mutagen., 10, 89-102.
Fitzgeorge, R.B., Clark, S.A., and Keevil, C.W. 1994 Routes of intoxication. In: G.A.
Codd, T. M. Jeffries, C.W. Keevil and E. Potter [Eds] 1st International Symposium on
Detection Methods for Cyanobacterial (Blue-Green Algal) Toxins, Royal Society of
Chemistry, Cambridge, UK, 69-74.
Francis, G. 1978 Poisonous Australian lake. Nature, 18, 11-12.
Fujiki, H., Mori, M., Nakayasu, M., Tereda, M., Sugimura, T. and Moore, R.E. 1981
Indole alkaloids: dihydroteleocidin B, teleocidin, and lyngbyatoxin-A as members of a
new class of tumor promoters. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci (USA)., 78, 3872-3876.
Fujiki, H., Suganuma, M., Hakii, H., Bartolini, G., Moore, R.E., Takayama, S. and
Sugimura, T. 1984 A 2-stage mouse skin carcinogenesis study of lyngbyatoxin-A. J.
Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol., 108(1), 174-176.
Fujiki, H. and Suganuma, M. 1993 Tumor promotion by inhibitors of protein
phosphatases 1 and 2A: the okadaic acid class of compounds. Adv. Cancer Res., 61,
143-194.
Fujiki, H., Suganuma, M., Suguri, H., Yoshizawa, S., Takagi, K., Nakayasu, M., Ojika, M.,
Yamada, K., Yasumoto, T., Moore, R.E. and Sugimura, T. 1990 New tumor promoters
from marine natural products. In: S. Hall and G. Strichartz [Eds] Marine Toxins: Origin,
Structure and Molecular Pharmacology, American Chemical Society, Washington D.C.,
232-240.
Genenah, A. and Shimizu, Y. 1981 Specific toxicity of paralytic shellfish poisons. J. Agric.
Food Chem., 29(6), 1289-1291.
Ghosh S., Khan, S.A., Wickstrom, M., Beasley, V. 1995 Effects of microcystin-LR on
actin and the actin-associated proteins alpha- actinin and talin in hepatocytes. Nat.
Toxins, 3(6), 405-414.
Grauer, F. 1961 Seaweed dermatitis. Arch. Dermatol., 84, 720-732.
Gunn, G., Rafferty, A., Rafferty, G., Cockburn, N., Edwards, C., Beatty, K. and Codd, G.
1992 Fatal canine neurotoxicosis attributed to blue green algae (cyanobacteria). Vet.
Rec., April 4, 301-302.
Hahn, S.T. and Capra, M. F. 1992 The cyanobacterium Oscillatoria erythraea - a
potential source of toxin in the ciguatera food-chain. Food Add. Contam., 9, 351-355.
Hashimoto, Y., Kamiya, H., Yamazato, K. and Nozawa, K. 1976 Occurrence of a toxic
blue-green alga inducing skin dermatitis in Okinawa. In: A. Ohsaka, K. Hayashi and Y.
Sawai [Eds] Animal. Plant, and Microbial Toxins. Plenum Publishing, New York, 333-338.
Hawkins, P.R. and Griffiths, D. J. 1993 Artificial destratification of a small tropical
reservoir: effects upon the phytoplankton. Hydrobiologia, 254, 169-181.
Hawkins, P.R., Chandrasena, N.R., Jones, G.J., Humpage, A.R. and Falconer, I.R. 1997
Isolation and toxicity of Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii from an ornamental lake. Toxicon,
35, 341-346.
Hawkins, P.R., Runnegar, M.T.C., Jackson, A.R.B. and Falconer, I. R. 1985 Severe
hepatotoxicity caused by the tropical cyanobacterium (blue-green alga)
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Woloszynska) Seenaya and Subba Raju isolated from a
domestic water supply reservoir. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 50(5), 1292-1295.
Henriksen, P., Carmichael, W.W., An, J. and Moestrup, Ø.1997 Detection of an
anatoxin-a(s)-like anticholinesterase in natural blooms and cultures of
cyanobacteria/blue-green algae from Danish lakes and in the stomach contents of
poisoned birds. Toxicon, 35, 901-913.
Holmes, C.F.B., Craig, M., McCready, T.L., Boland, M.P., Dawson, J.F., Chen, D.Z.X.,
Wang, K., Klix, H., Luu, H. A. et al., 1994 Regulation of signal transduction pathways by
peptide toxins. In: R.S. Hodges,. and J.A. Smith [Eds] Pept. Chem. Struct. Biol., Proc.
Am. Pept. Symp., 13th, ESCOM: Leiden, Netherlands, 577-579.
Honkanen, R.E., Zwiller, J., Moore, R.E., Daily, S L., Khatra, B.S., Dukelow, M. and
Boynton, A. L. 1990 Characterization of microcystin- LR, a potent inhibitor of type 1 and
type 2A protein phosphatases. J. Biol. Chem., 265, 19401-19404.
Hooser, S.B., Beasley, V.R., Basgall, E.J., Carmichael, W.W. and Haschek, W.M. 1990
Microcystin-LR-induced ultrastructural changes in rats. Vet. Pathol., 27(1), 9-15.
Hooser, S.B., Beasley, V.R., Waite, L.L., Kuhlenschmidt, M.S., Carmichael, W.W. and
Haschek, W.M. 1991 Actin filament alteration in rat hepatocytes induced in vivo and in
vitro by microcystin-LR, a hepatotoxin from the blue-green alga, Microcystis aeruginosa.
Vet. Pathol., 28, 259-266.
Humpage, A.R, Falconer, I.R. 1999 Microcystin-LR and liver tumour promotion: effects
on cytokinesis, ploidy, and apoptosis in cultured hepatocytes. Env. Toxicol. Water Qual.,
14(1), In Press.
Humpage, A.R., Rositano, J., Bretag, A.H., Brown, R., Baker, P.D., Nicholson, B. C. and
Steffensen, D.A. 1994 Paralytic shellfish poisons from Australian cyanobacterial blooms.
Aust. J. Mar. Freshwater Res., 45(5), 761-771.
IARC 1995 IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans,
Volume 63, Dry cleaning, some chlorinated solvents and other industrial chemicals.
Preamble 12: Evaluation, International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, 22-26.
IPCS 1984 Environmental Health Criteria 37. Aquatic Marine and Freshwater Biotoxins.
International Programme on Chemical Safety, World Health Organization, Geneva.
IPCS 1994 Environmental Health Criteria 170. Assessing Human Health Risks of
Chemicals; Derivation of Guidance Values for Health-based Exposure Limits.
International Programme on Chemical Safety, World Health Organization, Geneva.
Ito, E., Kondo, F. and Harada, K.-I. 1997a Hepatic necrosis in aged mice by oral
administration of microcystin-LR. Toxicon, 35(2), 231-239.
Ito, E., Kondo, F., Terao, K. and Harada, K.-I. 1997b Neoplastic nodular formation in
mouse liver induced by repeated intraperitoneal injections of microcystin-LR. Toxicon,
35(9), 1453-1457.
Jackson, A., McInnes, A., Falconer, I. and Runnegar, M. 1984 Clinical and pathological
changes in sheep experimentally poisoned by the blue-green algae Microcystis
aeruginosa. Vet. Pathol., 21, 102-113.
Jochimsen, E.M., Carmichael, W.W., An, J., Cardo, D.M., Cookson, S.T., Holmes,
C.E.M., Antunes, M.B. de C., Filho, D.A. de M., Lyra, T.M., Barreto, V.S.T., Azevedo,
S.M.F.O. and Jarvis, W. R. 1998 Liver failure and death after exposure to microcystins at
a haemodialysis center in Brazil. New Engl. J. Med., 338(13), 873-878.
Kao, C.Y. 1993 Paralytic shellfish poisoning. In: I. Falconer [Ed.] Algal Toxins in Seafood
and Drinking Water, Academic Press, London, 75-86.
Keleti, G. and Sykora, J.L. 1982 Production and properties of cyanobacterial endotoxins.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 43, 104-109.
Keleti, G., Sykora, J.L., Libby, E.C. and Shapiro, M.A. 1979 Composition and biological
properties of lipopolysaccharides isolated from Schizothrix calcicola (Ag.) Gomont
(cyanobacteria). Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 38, 471-477.
Kondo, F., Matsumoto, H., Yamada, S., Ishikawa, N., Ito, E., Nagata, S., Ueno, Y.,
Suzuki, M. and Harada, K.-I. 1996 Detection and identification of metabolites of
microcystins formed in vivo in mouse and rat livers. Chem. Res. Toxicol., 9(8), 1355-
1359.
Kotak, B.G., Kenefick, S.L., Fritz, D.L., Rousseaux, C.G., Prepas, E.E. and Hrudey, S.E.
1993 Occurrence and toxicological evaluation of cyanobacterial toxins in Alberta lakes
and farm dugouts. Water Res., 27(3), 495-506.
Kuiper-Goodman, T., Gupta, S., Combley, H. and Thomas, B.H. 1994 Microcystins in
drinking water: risk assessment and derivation of a possible guidance value for drinking
water. In: D.A. Steffensen and B.C. Nicholson [Eds] Toxic Cyanobacteria - A Global
Perspective, Australian Centre for Water Quality Research, Salisbury, 17-23.
Lin, J.R. and Chu, F.S. 1994a Kinetics of distribution of microcystin LR in serum and
liver cytosol of mice: An immunochemical analysis. J. Agric. Food Chem., 42(4), 1035-
1040.
Lin, J.R. and Chu, F. S. 1994b In vitro neutralization of the inhibitory effect of
Microcystin-LR to protein phosphatase 2A by antibody against the toxin. Toxicon, 32(5),
605-613.
Lippy, E.C. and Erb, J. 1976 Gastrointestinal illness at Sewickley, PA. J. Am. Water
Works Assoc., 68, 606-610.
MacKintosh, C., Beattie, K.A., Klumpp, S., Cohen, P. and Codd, G.A. 1990
Cyanobacterial microcystin-LR is a potent and specific inhibitor of protein phosphatases
1 and 2A from both mammals and higher plants. Fed. Eur. Biochem. Soc. Lett., 264(2),
187-192.
Mahmood, N.A. and Carmichael, W.W. 1986a The pharmacology of anatoxin-a(s), a
neurotoxin produced by the freshwater cyanobacterium Anabaena flos-aquae NRC 525-
17. Toxicon, 24(5), 425-434.
Mahmood, N.A. and Carmichael, W.W. 1986b Paralytic shellfish poisons produced by
the freshwater cyanobacterium Aphanizomenon flos-aquae nh-5. Toxicon, 24(2), 175-
186.
Mahmood, N.A., Carmichael, W.W. and Pfahler, D. 1988 Anticholinesterase poisonings
in dogs from a cyanobacterial (blue-green algae) bloom dominated by Anabaena flos-
aquae. Am. J. Vet. Res., 49(4), 500-503.
Matsunaga, S., Moore, R.E., Niemczura, W.P. and Carmichael, W.W. 1989 Anatoxin-a(s)
a potent anticholinesterase from Anabaena flos-aquae. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 111(20),
8021-8023.
Matsushima, R., Yoshizawa, S., Watanabe, M.F., Harada, K., Furusawa, M., Carmichael,
W W. and Fujiki, H. 1990 In vitro and in vivo effects of protein phosphatase inhibitors,
microcystins and nodularin, on mouse skin and fibroblasts. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Comm., 171(2), 867-874.
McBarron, E. and May, V. 1966 Poisoning of sheep in New South Wales by the blue-
green alga Anacystis cyanea (Kuetz.) Dr. and Dail. Aust. Vet. J., 42, 449-453.
McFarren, E., Schafer, M., Cambell, J. and Lewis, K. 1958 Public health significance of
paralytic shellfish poisons. Adv. Food Res., 10, 135-179.
Medcoff, J., Leim, A., Needler, A., Needler, A., Gibbard, J. and Naubert, J. 1947
Paralytic shellfish poisoning on the Canadian Atlantic coast. Fish Res. Board Can. Bull.,
75, 32.
Meriluoto, J.A., Nygard, S.E., Dahlem, A.M. and Eriksson, J.E. 1990 Synthesis,
organotropism and hepatocellular uptake of two tritium-labeled epimers of
dihydromicrocystin-LR, a cyanobacterial peptide toxin analog. Toxicon, 28(12), 1439-
1446.
Meyer, K., Sommer, H. and Schoenholz, P. 1928 Mussel poisoning. J. Prev. Med., 2,
365-394.
Mittal, A., Agarwal, M. and Schivpuri, D. 1979 Respiratory allergy to algae: clinical
aspects. Ann. Allergy, 42, 253-256.
Moikeha, S.N. and Chu, G.W. 1971 Dermatitis-producing alga Lyngbya majuscula
Gomont in Hawaii. II. Biological properties of the toxic factor. J. Phycol., 7, 8-13.
Molloy, L., Wonnacott, S., Gallagher, T., Brough, P.A. and Livett, B.G. 1995 Anatoxin-a
is a potent agonist of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor of bovine adrenal chromaffin
cells. Eur. J. Pharmacol., 289(3), 447-453.
Moore, R.E. 1977 Toxins from blue-green algae. BioScience, 27, 797-802.
Moore, R., Corbett, T., Patterson, G.M.L. and Valeriote, F.A. 1996 The search for new
antitumor drugs from blue-green algae. Curr. Pharm. Design, 2, 317-330.
Moore, R.E., Ohtani, I., Moore, B.S., de Koning, C.B., Yoshida, W.Y., Runnegar, M.T.C.
and Carmichael, W. W. 1993 Cyanobacterial toxins. Gazzetta Chimica Italiana, 123,
329-336.
Mynderse, J.S., Moore, R.E., Kashiwagi, M. and Norton, T.R. 1977 Antileukemia activity
in the Oscillatoriaceae: isolation of debromoaplysiatoxin from Lyngbya. Science, 196,
538-540.
Nagata, S., Soutome, H., Tsutsumi, T., Hasegawa, A., Sekijima M., Sugamata, M.,
Harada, K., Suganama, M. and Ueno, Y. 1995 Novel monoclonal antibodies against
microcystin and their protective activity for hepatotoxicity. Natural Toxins, 3, 78-86.
Namikoshi, M. and Rinehart, K L. 1996 Bioactive compounds produced by cyanobacteria.
J. Ind. Microbiol., 17, 373-384.
Negri, A.P. and Jones, G.J. 1995 Bioaccumulation of paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP)
toxins from the cyanobacterium Anabaena circinalis by the freshwater mussel Alathyria
condola. Toxicon, 33(5), 667-678.
Negri, A P., Jones, G.J. and Hindmarsh, M. 1995 Sheep mortality associated with
paralytic shellfish poisons from the cyanobacterium Anabaena circinalis. Toxicon, 33(10),
1321-1329.
Nishiwaki, R., Ohta, T., Sueoka, E., Suganuma, M., Harada, K., Watanabe, M.F., Fujiki,
H. 1994 Two significant aspects of microcystin-LR: specific binding and liver specificity.
Cancer Lett., 83(1-2), 283-289.
Nishiwaki-Matsushima, R., Ohta, T., Nishiwaki, S., Suganuma, M., Kohyama, K.,
Ishikawa, T., Carmichael, W. W. and Fujiki, H. 1992 Liver tumor promotion by the
cyanobacterial cyclic peptide toxin microcystin LR. J. Cancer Res. din. Oncol., 118(6),
420-424.
Odriozola, E., Ballabene, N. and Salamano, A. 1984 Poisoning of cattle by blue-green
algae (Microcystis aeruginosa). Rev. Argent. Microbiol., 16(4), 219-224.
Ohta, T., Sueoka, E., Iida, N., Komori, A., Suganuma, M., Nishiwaki, R., Tatematsu, M.,
Kim, S.J., Carmichael, W.W., Fujiki, H. 1994 Nodularin, a potent inhibitor of protein
phosphatases 1 and 2A, is a new environmental carcinogen in male F344 rat liver.
Cancer Res., 54(24), 6402-6406.
Ohtani, I., Moore, R.E. and Runnegar, M.T.C. 1992 Cylindrospermopsin - a potent
hepatotoxin from the blue-green alga Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii. J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
114(20), 7941-7942.
Oshima, Y. 1995 Postcolumn derivatization liquid chromatographic method for paralytic
shellfish toxins. J. AOAC Int., 78, 528.
Pearson, M.J., Ferguson, A.J.D., Codd, G.A., Reynolds, C.S., Fawell, J.K., Hamilton,
R.M., Howard, S.R. and Attwood, M.R. 1990 Toxic Blue-Green Algae. A report by the
National Rivers Authority, Water Quality Series No. 2, London, England, 128 pp.
Persson, P., Sivonen, K., Keto, K., Kononen, K., Niemi, M. and Viljamaa, H. 1984
Potentially toxic blue-green algae (cyanobacteria) in Finnish natural waters. Aqua Fenn,
14(2), 147-154.
Pilotto, L.S., Douglas, R.M., Burch, M.D., Cameron, S., Beers, M., Rouch, G.R.,
Robinson, P., Kirk, M., Cowie, C.T., Hardiman, S., Moore, C. and Attewell R.G. 1997
Health effects of recreational exposure to cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) during
recreational water-related activities. Aust. N. Zealand J. Public Health, 21, 562-566.
Prakash, A., Medcof, J. and Tennant, A. 1971 Paralytic Shellfish Poisoning in Eastern
Canada. Bulletin 177, Fisheries Research Board of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 87 pp.
Prepas, E.E., Kotak, B.G., Campbell, L.M. Evans, J.C., Hrudey, S.E. Holmes, C.F.B.
1997 Accumulation and elimination of cyanobacterial hepatotoxins by the freshwater
clam Anodonta grandis simpsoniana. Can J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 54, 41-46.
Pybus, M. and Hobson, D. 1986 Mass mortality of bats due to probable blue-green algae
toxicity. J. Wildl. Dis. 22(3), 449-450.
Raziuddin, S., Siegelman, H.W. and Tornabene, T.G. 1983 Lipopolysaccharides of the
cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa. Eur. J. Biochem., 137, 333-336.
Repavich, W.M., Sonzogni, W.C., Standridge, J.H., Wedepohl, R.E. and Meisner, L.F.
1990 Cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) in Wisconsin waters: acute and chronic toxicity.
Water Res., 24(2), 225-231.
Ressom, R., Soong, F.S., Fitzgerald, J., Turczynowicz, L., El Saadi, O., Roder, D.,
Maynard, T. and Falconer, I. 1994 Health Effects of Toxic Cyanobacteria (Blue-Green
Algae). Australian National Health and Medical Research Council, Looking Glass Press,
108 pp.
Robinson, N.A., Miura, G.A., Matson, C.F., Dinterman, R.E. and Pace, J.G. 1989
Characterization of chemically tritiated microcystin-LR and its distribution in mice.
Toxicon, 27(9), 1035-1042.
Robinson, N.A., Pace, J.G., Matson, C.F., Miura, G.A. and Lawrence, W.B. 1991 Tissue
distribution, excretion and hepatic biotransformation of microcystin-LR in mice. J.
Pharmacol. Exp. Ther., 256(1), 176-182.
Rodrigue, D.C., Etzel, R.A., Hall, S., de Porras, E., Velasquez, O.H., Tauxe, R.V.,
Kilbourne, E. M. and Blake, P.A. 1990 Lethal paralytic shellfish poisoning in Guatemala.
Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 42(3), 267-271.
Runnegar, M.T.C. and Falconer, I.R. 1982 The in vivo and in vitro biological effects of
the reptide hepatotoxin from the blue-green alga Microcystis aeruginosa. South African J.
Sci., 78, 363-366.
Runnegar, M.T.C. and Falconer, I.R. 1986 Effect of toxin from the cyanobacterium
Microcystis aeruginosa on ultrastructural morphology and actin polymerization in isolated
hepatocytes. Toxicon, 24(2), 109-115.
Runnegar, M.T.C., Andrews, J., Gerdes, R.G. and Falconer, I.R. 1987 Injury to
hepatocytes induced by a peptide toxin from the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa.
Toxicon, 25(11), 1235-1239.
Runnegar, M.T.C., Falconer, I R. and Silver, J. 1981 Deformation of isolated rat
hepatocytes by a peptide hepatotoxin from the blue-green alga Microcystis aeruginosa.
Naunyn-Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol., 317, 268-272.
Runnegar, M.T.C., Falconer, I.R., Buckley, T. and Jackson, A.R. 1986 Lethal potency
and tissue distribution of 125I-labelled toxic peptides from the blue-green alga Microcystis
aeruginosa. Toxicon, 24(5), 506 - 509.
Runnegar, M.T.C., Gerdes, R G. and Falconer, I R. 1991 The uptake of the
cyanobacterial hepatotoxin microcystin by isolated rat hepatocytes. Toxicon, 29(1), 43-
51.
Runnegar, M.T.C., Jackson, A.R.B. and Falconer, I.R. 1988 Toxicity of the
cyanobacterium Nodularia spumigena mertens. Toxicon, 26(2), 143-151.
Runnegar, M.T.C., Kong, S.M. and Berndt, N. 1993 Protein phosphatase inhibition and
in vivo hepatotoxicity of microcystins. Am. J. Physiol., 265(2 Part 1), G224-G230.
Runnegar, M.T.C., Kong, S.M., Zhong, Y Z., Ge, J.L. and Lu, S.C. 1994 The role of
glutathione in the toxicity of a novel cyanobacterial alkaloid cylindrospermopsin in
cultured rat hepatocytes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 201, 235-241.
Runnegar, M.T.C., Kong, S.M., Zhong, Y.Z. and Lu, S.C. 1995 Inhibition of reduced
glutathione synthesis by cyanobacterial alkaloid cylindrospermopsin in cultured rat
hepatocytes. Biochem. Pharmacol., 49(2), 219-225.
Sato, K., Kitahara, A., Satoh, K., Ichikawa, T., Tatematsu, M. and Ito, N. 1984 The
placental form of glutathione S-transferase as a new marker protein for preneoplasia in
rat chemical carcinogenesis. Gann, 75, 199-202.
Sawyer, P., Gentile, J. and Sasner, J.J. 1968 Demonstration of a toxin from
Aphanizomenon flos-aquae (L)Ralfs. Can. J. Microbiol., 14, 1199-1204.
Scarafia M.E., Agnese A.M., Cabrera J.L. 1995 Microcystis aeruginosa: behaviour and
toxic features in San Roque Dam (Argentina). Nat. Toxins, 3(2), 75-77.
Seawright, A.A., Nolan, C.C., Shaw, G.R., Chiswell, R.K., Norris, R.L., Moore, M.R.,
Smith, M.J. 1999 The oral toxicity for mice of the tropical cyanobacterium
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Woloszynska). Env. Toxicol. Water Qual., 14(1), In
Press.
Shaw, G.R., Seawright, A.A., Chiswell, R.K., Nolan, C.C. 1997 Report to the South East
Queensland Water Board on Cylindrospermopsis research project by NRCET, National
Research Centre for Environmental Toxicology, Queensland, Australia.
Skulberg, O.M. 1979 Giftvirkninger av blågrønnalger - første tilfelle av Microcystis-
forgiftning registrert i Norge (Toxic effects of blue-green algae - first case of Microcystis
poisoning reported from Norway). Tema-rapport 4, Norsk Institutt for Vannforskning,
Oslo, 42 pp. (English summary).
Skulberg, O.M., Carmichael, W.W., Andersen, R.A., Matsunaga, S., Moore, R.E. and
Skulberg, R. 1992 Investigations of a neurotoxic oscillatorialean strain (Cyanophyceae)
and its toxin. Isolation and characterisation of homoanatoxin-a. Environ. Toxicol. Chem.,
11, 321-329.
Soliakov, L., Gallagher, T. and Wonnacott, S. 1995 Anatoxin-a-evoked [3H] dopamine
release from rat striatal synaptosomes. Neuropharmacology, 34(11), 1535-1541.
Sommer, H. and Meyer, K. 1937. Paralytic shellfish poisoning. Arch. Pathol., 24, 560-
598.
Stevens, D.K. and Krieger, R.I. 1989 Application of a sensitive, GC-ECD analysis for
anatoxin-a. Toxicon, 27, 79.
Terao, K., Ohmori, S., Igarashi, K., Ohtani, I., Watanabe, M., Harada, K.-I., Ito, E. and
Watanabe, M. 1994 Electron microscopic studies on experimental poisoning in mice
induced by cylindrospermopsin isolated from blue-green alga Umezakia natans. Toxicon,
32, 833-843.
Teixera, M.G.L.C., Costa, M.C.N., Carvalho, V.L.P., Pereira, M.S. and Hage, E., 1993
Bulletin of the Pan American Health Organization 27, 244-253.
Tisdale, E. 1931 Epidemic of intestinal disorders in Charleston, WVa, occurring
simultaneously with unprecented water supply conditions. Am. J. Public Health, 21, 198-
200.
Toivola, D.M., Eriksson, J.E., Brautigan, D.L. 1994 Identification of protein phosphatase
2A as the primary target for microcystin-LR in rat liver homogenates. FEBS Lett., 344(2-
3), 175-180.
Turner, P.C., Gammie, A.J., Hollinrake, K. and Codd, G.A. 1990 Pneumonia associated
with cyanobacteria. Br. Med. J., 300, 1440-1441.
Ueno, Y., Nagata, S., Tsutsumi, T., Hasegawa, A., Watanabe, M., Park, H.D., Chen, G.-
C., Chen, G. and Yu, S. -Z. 1996 Detection of microcystins, a blue-green algal
hepatotoxin, in drinking water sampled in Haimen and Fusui, endemic areas of primary
liver cancer in China, by highly sensitive immunoassay. Carcinogenesis, 17(6), 1317-
1321.
Wang, H.-B. and Zhu, H -G. 1996 Promoting activity of microcystins extracted from
water blooms in SHE cell transformation assay. Biomed. Environ. Sci., 9, 46-51.
Watts, J.S., Reilly, J., Dacosta, F. and Krop, S. 1966 Acute toxicity of paralytic shellfish
poison in rats of different ages. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 8, 286-294.
Weckesser, J. and Drews, G. 1979 Lipopolysaccharides of photosynthetic prokaryotes.
Ann. Rev. Microbiol., 33, 215-239.
WHO 1993 Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality, Volume 1. Recommendations, World
Health Organization, Geneva.
WHO 1996 Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality, Volume 2. Health Criteria and other
supporting information. World Health Organization, Geneva.
WHO 1998 Guidelines for Drinking water Quality, Second Edition, Addendum to Volume
2, Health Criteria and other supporting information. World Health Organization, Geneva.
Wiberg, G.S. and Stephenson, N.R. 1960 Toxicologic studies on paralytic shellfish
poison. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 2, 607-615.
Yamasaki, H. 1988 Multistage carcinogenesis: implications for risk estimation. Cancer
Metastasis Rev., 7, 5-18.
Yoshida, T., Makita, Y., Nagata, S., Tsutsumi, T., Yoshida, F., Sekijima, M., Tamura, S.-I.
and Ueno, Y. 1997 Acute oral toxicity of microcystin-LR, a cyanobacterial hepatotoxin, in
mice. Nat. Toxins, 5, 91-95.
Yoshizawa, S., Matsushima, R., Watanabe, M.F., Harada, K.I., Ichihara, A., Carmichael,
W.W. and Fujiki, H. 1990 Inhibition of protein phosphatases by microcystin and nodularin
associated with hepatotoxicity. J. Cancer Res. din. Oncol., 116, 609-614.
Yu, S. -Z. 1989 Drinking water and primary liver cancer. In: Z.Y. Tang, M.C. Wu and S.S.
Xia [Eds] Primary Liver Cancer. China Academic Publishers, New York, 30-37.
Yu, S.-Z. 1995 Primary prevention of hepatocellular carcinoma. J. Gastroenterol
Hepatol., 10(6), 674-82.
Zilberg, B. 1966 Gastroenteritis in Salisbury European children - a five-year study. Cent.
Afr. J. Med., 12(9), 164-168.
Chapter 5. SAFE LEVELS AND SAFE PRACTICES
This chapter was prepared by Ian Falconer, Jamie Bartram, Ingrid Chorus, Tine Kuiper-
Goodman, Hans Utkilen, Mike Burch and Geoffrey A. Codd
Throughout their lifespan, humans are exposed to many chemical substances, both
beneficial and harmful. It is not possible to eliminate exposure to all toxins in our
environment. Of the harmful chemicals, some are anthropogenic and others occur
naturally. Although cyanotoxins occur naturally, their presence and abundance are, to a
large extent, influenced and increased by human action. The extent to which
cyanotoxins pose a human health risk depends on human exposure to these toxins.
Reducing human exposure to cyanotoxins may be achieved either through preventing
the occurrence of hazardous cell densities of toxic cyanobacteria, or by placing barriers
(such as drinking water treatment or bathing restrictions) that would reduce human
exposure to the cyanobacterial hazard.
The purpose of this chapter is to describe how "safe" levels, such as guideline values,
are derived and how "safe practices" are likely to assist in minimising unsafe human
exposures.
Establishing and controlling safe practices and procedures to reduce or prevent
microbiological problems are common in the food industry, where the process is known
as Hazard Analysis of Critical Control Points (HACCP). There is also a long history of
similar activities in relation to drinking water supply, where the process is referred to as
"sanitary inspection". This type of approach is also starting to be applied in dealing with
some natural toxins, such as fungal toxins (mycotoxins). Safe practice guidelines can
assist in reducing exposure, even for substances for which a guideline value cannot be
set (for example because of inadequate scientific data), or where implementation of a
guideline value is very difficult (for example because of analytical or sampling problems).
Major routes of exposure to cyanotoxins include oral and dermal routes through drinking
water and recreational water use. However, the very limited available information
suggests that inhalation in aerosols (potentially possible while showering, water-skiing or
during certain work practices) may be an equally important route given that the toxicity of
microcystin following intranasal instillation approaches that for intraperitoneal (i.p.)
injection (Fitzgeorge et al., 1994). In some countries, cyanobacterial dietary supplements
may constitute a major route of oral intake for a small sub-population, if the cyanotoxin
levels in the supplements are not controlled. A specific route (intravenous) affecting a
susceptible sub-population may occur in dialysis clinics (see Box 4.4).
The extent or duration of exposure throughout the year is shorter if water resources are
populated by cyanobacteria at specific seasons. In temperate climates, water bodies
dominated by the genus Microcystis usually exhibit a bloom season of 3-5 months,
whereas in milder climates, such as in Australia, some of South America and South
Africa, this genus may bloom for 6-10 months. Other taxa, such as Planktothrix agardhii,
may show perennial mass development even in temperate climates. This is the case in
some lowland regions of north-western Europe, especially in years with mild winters
without ice cover (see Figure 2.7).
5.1 Tolerable exposures
5.1.1 Tolerable daily intake
The repair mechanisms of the body are continuously active and ensure that cells and
tissues are replaced as they are damaged by normal "wear and tear", as well as by
external factors such as toxic chemicals. The tolerable daily intake (TDI) is the amount of
a potentially harmful substance that can be consumed daily over a lifetime with
negligible risk of adverse health effects (see Chapter 4).
Exposure to several harmful chemicals or conditions simultaneously may lead to
potentiation, or to antagonistic interaction. Potentiation results in effects that are larger
than the responses caused by the individual chemicals or conditions by themselves and
this effect has been observed with cyanotoxins, as noted in section 4.2. However, there
is experimental evidence that potentiation is unlikely to occur at low levels of exposure,
such as the TDI. For cyanotoxins, the animal and human toxicity data are incomplete for
the majority of the compounds. The available data have been reviewed in Chapter 4 and
allow only the derivation of a provisional TDI for microcystin-LR (see section 4.2.1).
Clearly, this does not imply that microcystin-LR is the only microcystin that is toxic, or
that other cyanotoxins are less harmful. It merely reflects the lack of toxicological data.
5.1.2 WHO guideline values for drinking water quality
The World Health Organization (WHO) Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality (WHO,
1993, 1996) represent a scientific consensus, based on very broad international
participation, of the health risks presented by microbes and chemicals in drinking water.
This scientific consensus is used to derive "guideline values" which are associated with
guidance on monitoring and management aspects. The guideline values themselves are
based upon a number of assumptions that may be amended locally or nationally
according to specific circumstances (Box 5.1).
A guideline value for lifetime consumption of a chemical contaminant of drinking water is
usually calculated by applying the derived TDI to a typical daily water intake in litres (L)
by an individual of a given body weight (bw). The proportion (P) of total daily intake of
the contaminant which is ingested from the drinking water needs to be considered,
because some intake may come from food or by inhalation from air (WHO, 1996). The
guideline value is then calculated as:
A provisional guideline value of 1.0 µg l-1 has been adopted by WHO for microcystin-LR
(WHO, 1998). In order to derive this, an average adult body weight of 60 kg and an
average water intake for adults of 2 litres per day was used, as is standard practice. The
provisional TDI of 0.04 µg kg-1 bw per day (section 4.2) was used and the proportion of
the TDI allocated to drinking water (P) was assumed to be 0.8. The resulting
concentration (0.96 µg l-1) was rounded to 1.0 µg l-1. In water containing cyanobacterial
cells, this guideline value should be applied to the total cell-bound and extracellular
microcystins.
There were insufficient data to derive a guideline value for cyanotoxins other than
microcystin-LR. For saxitoxins (STX), the guideline of 80 µg STX equivalents per 100 g
(this is the conventional way of expressing this value) shellfish, used in North America
for closing shellfish growing areas for harvesting, may provide preliminary orientation
(IPCS, 1984).
Exceeding the provisional guideline value of 1 µg l-1 for microcystin-LR can be tolerated
(see Box 5.1 for an explanation of handling short-term deviations). This may occur if, for
example, discontinuation of exposure is expected in the near future due to
implementation of measures to eliminate cyanotoxins from drinking water or
cyanobacteria from the water resource. In such instances of guideline exceedances, it
may be appropriate that information is communicated to the public, and especially to
particularly susceptible sub-populations (such as patients with liver disease, parents of
infants, dialysis centres or dialysis patients).
5.1.3 Assessment of microcystins other than microcystin-LR in relation to the
guideline value
There are more than 60 different analogues of microcystin (see section 3.1.1) and, in
many regions, microcystin-LR is not the most commonly occurring microcystin. It may
not even be amongst the microcystins detected. The expression and interpretation of
quantitative results from analysis or assay for these toxins in relation to the WHO
guideline value for microcystin-LR may, therefore, be problematic.
Box 5.1 Derivation of WHO guidelines for drinking water quality
The primary aim of the Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality (WHO, 1993) is the protection of
public health. The Guidelines are intended to be used as the basis for the development of
national standards that, if properly implemented, will ensure the safety of drinking water supplies
through the elimination, or reduction to a minimum concentration, of constituents of water that are
known to be hazardous to health. The guideline values recommended are not mandatory limits,
they are intended to be used in the development of risk management strategies which may
include national or regional standards in the context of local or national environmental, social,
economic and cultural conditions.
The main reason for not promoting the adoption of international standards for drinking water
quality is the advantage provided by the use of a risk-benefit approach (qualitative or quantitative)
to the establishment of national standards or regulations. This approach should lead to standards
and regulations that can be readily implemented and enforced and which ensure the use of
available financial, technical and institutional resources for maximum public health benefit.
The judgement of safety, or what is a tolerable level of risk in certain circumstances, is a matter in
which society as a whole has a role to play. It should be recalled that water is essential to sustain
life and the Guidelines therefore emphasise the importance of securing water supply. They also
indicate that protection of supplies from contamination is almost invariably the best method of
ensuring safe drinking water and is to be preferred to treating a contaminated water supply to
render it suitable for consumption.
A principle of the Guidelines is that the potential consequences of microbial contamination are
such that its control must always be of paramount importance and must never be compromised.
The health risk due to toxic chemicals in drinking water differs from that caused by microbiological
contaminants. There are few chemical constituents of water that can lead to acute health
problems except through massive accidental contamination of a supply. Moreover, experience
shows that, in such incidents, the water usually becomes undrinkable because of unacceptable
taste, odour and appearance. The fact that chemical contaminants are not normally associated
with acute effects places them in a lower priority category than microbial contaminants, the
effects of which may be acute and widespread.
It is important that guideline values are both practical and feasible to implement as well as
protective of public health. Guideline values are not set at concentrations lower than the detection
limits achievable under routine laboratory operating conditions. Moreover, guideline values are
recommended only when control techniques are available to remove or reduce the concentration
of the contaminant to the desired level. In some instances provisional guideline values are set for
constituents for which there is some evidence of a potential hazard but where the available
information on health effects is limited. Provisional guideline values are also set for substances
for which the calculated guideline value would be: (i) below the practical quantification level; or (ii)
below the level that can be achieved through practical treatment methods. Finally, provisional
guideline values are set for substances when it is likely that guideline values will be exceeded as
a result of disinfection procedures.
The first edition of Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality was published by WHO in 1984 and
1985. The second editions of the three volumes of the guidelines were published in 1993, 1996
and 1997; and the Addenda to the second edition were published in 1997 and 1998.
• A guideline value represents the concentration of a constituent that does not result in any
significant risk to the health of the consumer over a lifetime of consumption.
• The quality of water defined by the Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality is such that it is
suitable for human consumption and for all usual domestic purposes, including personal hygiene.
However, water of a higher quality may be required for some special purposes, such as renal
dialysis.
• When a guideline value is exceeded, this should be a signal: (i) to investigate the cause with a
view to taking remedial action; and (ii) to consult with, and seek advice from, the authority
responsible for public health.
• Although the guideline values describe a quality of water that is acceptable for lifelong
consumption, the establishment of these guideline values should not be regarded as implying that
the quality of drinking water may be degraded to the recommended level. Indeed, a continuous
effort should be made to maintain drinking water quality at the highest possible level.
• Short-term deviations above the guideline values do not necessarily mean that the water is
unsuitable for consumption. The amount by which, and the period for which, any guideline value
can be exceeded without affecting public health depends upon the specific substance involved. It
is recommended that when a guideline value is exceeded, the surveillance agency (usually the
authority responsible for public health) should be consulted for advice on suitable action, taking
into account the intake of the substance from sources other than drinking water (for chemical
constituents), the toxicity of the substance, the likelihood and nature of any adverse effects, the
practicability of remedial measures, and similar factors.
• In developing national drinking water standards based on these guideline values, it will be
necessary to take account of a variety of geographical, socio-economic, dietary and other
conditions affecting potential exposure. This may lead to national standards that differ appreciably
from the guideline values.
The most widely used analytical technique for the detection and quantification of
individual microcystin variants for which quantitative reference materials are available is
high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) (see section 13.4.1 and Box 13.5). For
toxin variants where reference materials are available, HPLC results can be truly
quantitative. For HPLC peaks that identify microcystin variants for which no standards
are available but the result has been derived from a comparison with the concentration
of the standard for microcystin-LR, the estimates can be expressed as "concentration
equivalents" (CE) of microcystin-LR. It is therefore possible, using HPLC, to derive an
approximate concentration of total microcystins in a sample expressed in terms of
microcystin-LR CE. However, some of the observed HPLC peaks may relate to
toxicologically inactive or weakly toxic variants. In terms of "toxicity equivalents" (TE) of
microcystin-LR the actual toxicity of an unknown sample reported as microcystin-LR
equivalents (CE) is likely to be less than the same concentration of pure microcystin-LR,
because microcystin-LR is one of the most potent microcystins, at least in acute terms
(see Table 3.2). Thus, the microcystin CE approach would result in a "worst case"
estimate of toxic microcystin concentration.
A toxin concentration measured from a water or bloom sample by a bioassay (such as
the mouse bioassay or the phosphatase bioassay) may give a toxin concentration value
which can be expressed as microcystin-LR TE, provided the assay has been calibrated
using microcystin-LR as the quantification standard (which is usually the case). This
measure of total microcystin concentration expressed as microcystin-LR TE will be
closer in actual (acute) toxicity to a solution of the same concentration of pure
microcystin-LR. The position of enzyme assays, such as in vitro protein phosphatase
inhibition assays, in this context is currently unclear. Differences in toxicity of different
microcystins include variation in their ability to enter intact cells and in their capacity to
inhibit protein phosphatases.
In practice, it is important to report quantitative analytical results for samples containing
several microcystins with the above qualifications in mind and to indicate the method
and assumptions used for deriving the quantitative value. If it is necessary to calculate
quantitative values for total microcystins in a sample (and it is certainly important not to
ignore microcystins other than microcystin-LR), then the value should be qualified as
either microcystin-LR CE or TE. This information can be used (at best) as a preliminary
orientation of the hazard presented by the sample in relation to the guideline value (see
section 5.1.2).
Box 5.2 Epidemiological evidence for low-level cyanobacterial hazard
The epidemiological data of Pilotto et al.(1997) can be used as a basis for guideline derivation for
acute, non-cumulative health effects which are more likely to result in discomfort rather than
serious health outcomes. These data encompass the health effects on humans of intact
cyanobacterial cells and colonies and thus include effects of currently unknown substances and
bacteria associated with cyanobacterial colonies. The effects measured were eye irritation, ear
irritation, skin rash, as well as vomiting, diarrhoea, cold/flu symptoms, mouth ulcers and fever. An
elevated "Odds Ratio" for symptoms (3.44) was shown by the people who were in water contact
for more than one hour, at above 5,000 cyanobacterial cells per ml. Similar Odds Ratios were
seen for symptoms in people bathing in water with 5,000-20,000 cells per ml (2.71) and above
80,000 cells per ml (2.90).
5.1.4 Recreational water exposure
Three potential routes of exposure to cyanotoxins can be distinguished: direct contact of
exposed parts of the body, including sensitive areas such as the ears, eyes, mouth and
throat, and the areas covered by a bathing suit (Pilotto et al., 1997); accidental
swallowing (Turner et al., 1990); and inhalation of water. Cases of illness from accidental
swallowing and inhalation of Microcystis have been reported (see section 4.1) and
provide direct evidence of harm to recreational water users from cyanobacterial blooms
in the recreational water bodies.
Health effects observed in the prospective epidemiological study of Pilotto et al. (1997)
occurred at low cyanobacterial cell densities. These related clearly to the cyanobacterial
cell population, but not to the concentration of microcystins (see Box 5.2). Thus, this
hazard appears to be due to additional, or other unidentified, cyanobacterial metabolites
or compounds from associated bacteria, even at moderate levels of exposure.
Intake through oral ingestion or inhalation
Incorporation of toxins through swallowing, contact with nasal mucosa, or by inhalation
are likely to be important routes of exposure to cyanotoxins during water-contact sports.
Well-documented evidence from one animal experiment (Fitzgeorge et al., 1994) and
one case of multiple human illness (Turner et al., 1990) indicates that inhalation and
resorption through nasal and pharyngeal mucous membranes may present a high risk in
water sports involving intensive submersion of the head (jumping from diving boards,
sailboarding, canoe capsizing, competitive swimming) and inhalation of aerosols (water
skiing).
Experimental results indicate a hazard of cumulative liver damage by repeated
microcystin intake (Fitzgeorge et al., 1994, see section 4.2.1), as can occur during a
holiday with daily bathing at a recreational site with a high density of microcystin-
containing cyanobacteria. Sub-acute liver injury is likely to go unnoticed, because signs
of liver injury are only apparent after severe injury. In addition, the dose-response curve
for liver injury from microcystins is relatively steep. There may be little evidence of acute
liver damage when levels are close to those that could lead to severe acute toxicity, and
thus exposure at such levels is likely to be continued by people if they are uninformed of
the risk (e.g. for consecutive days of a holiday or hot spell), thereby increasing the risk of
cumulative liver damage.
Risks of ingestion are particularly high for children playing in shallow near-shore water
where scums tend to accumulate. Because the hazard of microcystin uptake is directly
related to the levels of toxins in the water (cell-bound as well as dissolved) and the
volume of water ingested or inhaled, the range in these levels needs to be recognised in
deriving guidelines for recreational water safety.
Direct contact
Allergic and toxic dermal reactions of varying severity are known from cyanobacteria as
well as from freshwater algae, but have not been documented extensively. Bathing suits,
and particularly diving suits, tend to aggravate such effects by accumulating
cyanobacterial cells, thereby enhancing the disruption of cells and hence the liberation of
cell contents onto the wearer's skin. Reports from the USA have recorded allergic
reactions from recreational exposure, and the cyanobacterial pigment phycocyanin was
shown to be responsible in one case (Cohen and Reif, 1953). Severe dermatitis,
resembling skin bums, has been reported from marine bathing in the presence of
cyanobacteria dislodged from rocks, particularly after storms in tropical seas (see
section 4.2.8).
5.2 Safe practices
The placing of barriers that reduce exposure to a cyanotoxin hazard is an important
measure and involves identifying "critical control points" and implementing measures for
their monitoring and control. In the case of cyanobacteria, critical control points might
include, for example, noting the tendency of a water body to develop blooms, scums or
mats. Monitoring schemes need to be developed that are capable of detecting
proliferation of cyanobacteria (linked to a programme of appropriate actions) and
drinking water treatment technology needs to be in existence that is capable of
preventing human exposure if cyanobacteria occur in source waters.
5.2.1 Drinking water
A drinking water supply safe from cyanotoxins will either draw upon a resource which
does not harbour cyanotoxins (e.g. groundwater or surface water which does not support
cyanobacterial growth), or have treatment in place that is likely to remove cyanobacterial
cells (without causing their disrupture) as well as removing cyanotoxins. However, in
many circumstances a potential cyanotoxin hazard can be managed effectively without
the necessity of advanced treatment processes, through water resource management
techniques (see Chapter 8) and removal of intact cells (see Chapter 9). The critical
control points for safe practices are indicated in Table 5.1.
Most of the reported incidents of human injury that have raised awareness of the
importance of cyanotoxins in drinking water have involved the inappropriate treatment of
water supplies, such as the use of copper sulphate in dealing with an established bloom
of cyanobacteria.
A very effective approach to safe practices may involve changing the drinking water
source. In a number of regions, surface waters are used for reasons of easy access and
tradition, although groundwater of high quality is available. Exploring options of
improving practices of drinking water abstraction with low technological input (such as
drilling wells, or using bankside filtration) may lead to health benefits. In China, a high
prevalence of endemic primary liver cancer was related to several factors: hepatitis B,
aflatoxins in the diet, and drinking surface water polluted with cyanobacteria likely to
contain microcystins. Changing the drinking water source from shallow, eutrophic ponds
and ditches to groundwater was a major element of a package of measures which
showed some success in improving health (Box 5.3).
5.2.2 Recreational waters
Recreational water use is likely to be a major route of exposure to cyanotoxins in some
parts of the world. Whereas similar approaches to resource protection apply as for
drinking water, there are very few further management options available once
cyanobacteria proliferate or accumulate in a recreational water. Because adequate
surveillance is sometimes difficult and management options, except precluding or
discouraging use, may be scarce, a large share of the responsibility for safe practices
lies with the users of a bathing site. The provision of adequate information to the public
becomes, therefore, a major responsibility of public authorities.
The growth of cyanobacteria in lakes and rivers used for recreational purposes has been
well recognised as a public nuisance. Water blooms of cyanobacteria may be associated
with unpleasant odours and the offensive appearance of lake shores, especially when
scums of the organisms accumulate and decay. Areas with extensive cyanobacterial
scums or accumulated detached mats on bathing beaches may be avoided by
swimmers and other water users because of the obviously unpleasant environment,
particularly if locally anaerobic water conditions or cyanobacterial toxins cause fish-kills,
further emphasising the unattractiveness of water contact. In temperate climates,
cyanobacterial dominance is most pronounced during the summer months, when the
demand for recreational water is highest. In some regions, cyanobacteria have been
abundant for more than a generation and visitors have accepted this water quality as
"normal" for their region. Multiple anecdotal observations of children playing with scum
material have been reported.
Table 5.1 Critical control points for assessing the intrinsic safety of a drinking water
supply which may contain cyanobacterial cells and/or toxins
Control point/issue Comments
Source water type The health risk associated with cyanobacterial contamination of
groundwaters is generally negligible. An exception may occur where
infiltration galleries are strongly influenced by eutrophic surface waters
Occurrence of Many surface water sources do not support cyanobacterial growth. In
cyanobacteria in source others, cyanobacteria may occur occasionally at low population
water and tendency for densities. In reservoirs and lakes with very low nutrient concentrations
bloom formation (total phosphorus < 10 µg P l-1) or rivers and reservoirs with a
hydrodynamic regime unfavourable for cyanobacteria (continuous high
flows especially during summer, or deep vertical mixing), other
phytoplankton species may regularly out-compete cyanobacteria. A
water source which does not have a history of cyanobacterial growth or
bloom formation is generally considered to present a low cyanotoxin
risk, regardless of treatment type. Where bloom formation is well
characterised in terms of annual cycles, the health risk may similarly be
low if control measures are in place for times of bloom formation. If
regular monitoring of source phytoplankton is in place, waters
presenting no significant cyanotoxin risk are easily identified (see Table
6.2)
Likelihood of cell lysis in Throughout cyanobacterial growth, most cyanotoxins are cell-bound.
transport or treatment Removal of intact cyanobacterial cells therefore largely removes
cyanotoxins (see section 3.4). Neurotoxins may be an exception under
some circumstances. When cyanobacterial cells die and decay (lyse),
toxins are released. Lysis can occur naturally or be caused by chemical
treatment, hydraulic and pumping regimes in different treatment steps,
and by long transport pipes for raw water. Thus, abstraction and
treatment systems which lead to cell lysis present an increased risk of
cyanotoxin release.
Treatment systems Methods, such as adsorption to some types of granular activated
capable of toxin carbon, and oxidation, can be effective in cyanotoxin removal. However,
removal conditions of operation are critical for success. If processes are
operated only periodically during cyanobacterial growth or reservoir
treatment, monitoring of plant functioning must be adequate to ensure
cyanotoxin removal. Substantially less is known about removal of
neurotoxins and cylindrospermopsin than about microcystins, thus toxin
monitoring of treatment steps and finished water is especially important
if potentially neurotoxic or cylindrospermopsin-producing cyanobacteria
proliferate
Box 5.3 Primary liver cancer and cyanotoxins in China
Primary Liver Cancer is one of the most common cancers in China. In 1994 and 1995, it
accounted for 24 mortalities per 100,000 population in some rural counties and cities; in these
areas it was ranked with stomach cancer as the two most important causes of cancer death.
The uneven geographic distribution of liver cancer was conspicuous, and "hot spots" could be
related to drinking water supply, e.g. in some clearly delineated areas of Nandong District, in
Jiangsu Province (particularly in Rudong, but also in Haimen and Qidong), in Nanhui (suburb of
Shanghai) and Fusui (Guangxi).
• In Rudong, Nanhui and Fusui people had blocked the drainage system, causing stagnation of
the water used for the drinking supply.
• In areas of Qidong-Haimen, with mortality rates 20 per 100,000, people drank water from the
Yangtze River, but in areas with mortalities of 100 per 100 000, pond and ditch water was used.
• Primary liver cancer mortalities 10 per 100,000 were found in areas where water from deep
wells were used for drinking.
Epidemiological study of the mortality showed strongest correlation with hepatitis B incidence, a
lesser correlation with aflatoxins in the diet, and a third correlation with drinking of pond and ditch
water. No correlations were found with insecticides. Samples of pond and ditch water showed
microcystin present in both endemic liver cancer areas and in areas with lower liver cancer rates.
Children in some endemic areas were fed corn paste and drank pond or ditch water from infancy.
Further, up to 43 per cent carry the hepatitis-B virus from infection by their HBsAg positive
mothers. The evidence suggests that aflatoxins from corn and microcystins from drinking water
act together with the hepatitis B virus in causing and promoting primary liver cancer.
In order to alleviate this situation, attempts have been launched over the past 20 years to change
the staple food and drinking habits of the people. Efforts began with the methods of harvest,
following the motto "quick to reap, quick to store, at a moisture content 12.5 per cent", aimed at
the reduction of fungal contamination. For some time, the government bought corn and
exchanged it for rice to reduce aflatoxin exposure, but this function has now been transferred to a
private initiative in the market economy. Recently, it has been estimated that more than 95 per
cent of the population eats rice rather than corn.
Even prior to the recognition of microcystins as possible promoters of endemic primary liver
cancer, the connection to poor quality surface water for drinking was observed and programmes
for construction of deep wells were begun. At present, 80 per cent of the population in some of
the afflicted regions have changed their water source to deep well water, and the incidence of
liver cancer has dropped consistently.
The mottoes for prevention of primary liver cancer now are:
"control of water - control of crops - prevention of hepatitis"
For additional discussion, see section 4.1.2.
Health impairments from cyanobacteria in recreational waters must be differentiated
between the chiefly irritative symptoms caused by unknown cyanobacterial substances
(as described in Box 5.2), and the more severe hazard of exposure to high
concentrations of known cyanotoxins, particularly microcystins. A single guideline
therefore, is not appropriate. Rather, a series of guidelines associated with incremental
severity and probability of adverse effects has been defined at three levels as described
below.
1. Relatively mild and/or low probabilities of adverse health effects
For protection from health outcomes not due to cyanotoxin toxicity, but due to the
irritative or allergenic effects of other cyanobacterial compounds, a guideline level of
20,000 cyanobacterial cells per ml (corresponding to 10 µg l-1 of chlorophyll a under
conditions of cyanobacterial dominance) can be derived from the prospective
epidemiological study by Pilotto et al. (1997) (see Box 5.2). Whereas the health
outcomes reported in this study were related to cyanobacterial density and duration of
exposure, they affected less than 30 per cent of the individuals exposed. At this
cyanobacterial density, 2-4 µg l-1 of microcystins may be expected if microcystin-
producing cyanobacteria are dominant, with 10 µg l-1 being possible with highly toxic
blooms (regional differences in microcystin content of the cells may be substantial). This
level is close to the WHO provisional drinking water guideline value of 1 µg l-1 for
microcystin-LR (WHO, 1998) which is intended to be safe for life-long consumption.
Thus, health outcomes due to microcystin are unlikely and providing information for
visitors to bathing sites with this low-level risk is considered to be sufficient. Additionally,
it is recommended that the authorities are informed in order to initiate further surveillance
of the site.
2. Moderate probability of adverse health effects
At higher concentrations of cyanobacterial cells, the probability of irritative symptoms is
elevated. Additionally, cyanotoxins (usually cell-bound) may reach concentrations with
potential health impact. To assess risk under these circumstances the data used for the
drinking water provisional guideline value may be applied. Swimmers involuntarily
swallow some water while bathing and the harm from ingestion of bathing water will be
comparable with that from a drinking water supply with the same toxin content. A
swimmer can expect to ingest up to 100-200 ml of water in one session, sail-board riders
and water skiers would probably ingest more.
A density of 100,000 cyanobacterial cells per ml (which is equivalent to approximately 50
µg l-1 of chlorophyll a if cyanobacteria dominate) is a guideline for a moderate health alert
in recreational waters. At this density, 20 µg l-1 of microcystins are likely, if the bloom
consists of Microcystis and has an average toxin content per cell of 0.2 pg, or 0.4 µg
microcystin per µg chlorophyll a (up to 50 µg l-1 of microcystin are possible) but toxin
levels may approximately double if Planktothrix agardhii is dominant. This toxin
concentration is equivalent to 20 times the WHO provisional guideline value for
microcystin-LR in drinking water, but would result in consumption of an amount close to
the TDI for an adult of 60 kg consuming 100 ml of water while swimming (rather than 2
litres of drinking water). However, a child of 15 kg consuming 250 ml of water during
extensive playing could be exposed to 10 times the TDI. The health risk will be
increased if the person exposed is particularly susceptible (e.g. because of chronic
hepatitis B). Therefore, cyanobacterial densities likely to cause microcystin
concentrations of 20 µg l-1 should trigger further action.
Non-scum-forming species of cyanobacteria, such as Planktothrix agardhii, have been
observed to reach cell densities corresponding to 200 µg l-1 of chlorophyll a or even more
in shallow water bodies. Transparency in such situations will be less than 0.5 m when
measured with a Secchi disk (see Chapter 11). Planktothrix agardhii has been shown to
contain a very high cell content of microcystin (1-2 µg per µg chlorophyll a) (see Figure
3.5) and therefore toxin concentrations of 200-400 µg l-1 can occur without scum
formation.
An additional reason for increased alert at 100,000 cells per ml is the potential of some
frequently occurring cyanobacterial species (particularly Microcystis spp. and Anabaena
spp.) to form scums (see Figure 5.1). These scums may increase local cell density and
thus toxin concentration by a factor of 1,000 or more in a few hours, thus rapidly
changing the risk from moderate to high (see next subsection) for bathers and others
involved in body-contact water sports.
Cyanobacterial scum formation presents a unique problem for routine monitoring carried
out at the usual time intervals of one or two weeks, because such monitoring intervals
are unlikely to detect hazardous maxima. Because of the potential for rapid scum
formation at a cyanobacterial density of 100,000 cells per ml or 50 µg l-1 chlorophyll a
(from scum-forming cyanobacterial taxa), intensification of surveillance and protective
measures are appropriate at these levels. Daily inspection for scum formation (if scum-
forming taxa are present) and measures to prevent exposure in areas prone to scum
formation are the two main options.
Intervention is recommended to trigger effective public information campaigns educating
people on avoidance of scum contact. Furthermore, in some cases (e.g. with frequent
scum formation), restriction of bathing may be judged to be appropriate. An intensified
monitoring programme should be implemented, particularly looking for scum
accumulations. Health authorities should be notified immediately.
Figure 5.1 Schematic illustration of scum-forming potential changing the cyanotoxin risk
from moderate to very high
Lake profile
Moderate risk level:
• 50 µg l-1 chlorophyll a
• or 100,000 cells l-1
• possibly 20 µg l-1 of microcystin in top 4 m of water body
100-fold accumulation to high risk level scum:
• 5,000 µg l-1 chlorophyll a
• or 10,000,000 cells l-1
• possibly 2,000 µg l-1 of microcystin in top 4 cm of water body
1,000-fold accumulation to very high risk level shore scum if wind sweeps scums from
100 m into 10 m:
• 50,000 µg l-1 chlorophyll a
• or 100,000,000 cells l-1
• possibly 20,000 µg l-1 of microcystin concentrated in one bay of the water body
Lake plan
3. High risk of adverse health effects
Abundant evidence exists for potentially severe health hazards associated with scums
caused by toxic cyanobacteria (see section 4.1). No human fatalities have been
unequivocally associated with oral ingestion of scum, even though numerous animals
have been killed by consuming water containing cyanobacterial scum material (see
section 4.1). This discrepancy can be explained by the fact that animals would drink
higher volumes of scum-containing water, compared with the small amounts of scum
accidentally ingested by humans during bathing (resulting in a lower dose).
Cyanobacterial scums can represent a thousand-fold to million-fold concentration of
cyanobacterial cell populations. It has been calculated that a child playing in a
Microcystis scum for a protracted period and ingesting a significant volume could receive
a lethal exposure, although there are no reports that this has actually occurred. Based
on evidence that the oral LD of microcystin-LR in mice is 5,000-11,600 µg kg-1 bw (see
50
section 4.2), for a child of 10 kg the ingestion of 2 mg of microcystin or less could be
expected to cause liver injury, because concentrations of up to 24 mg l-1 of microcystins
have been published from scum material (see section 3.2). Substantially higher
enrichment of scums (up to gelatinous consistency) is occasionally observed, and
accidental ingestion of smaller volumes of these could cause serious harm. Anecdotal
evidence indicates that children, and even adults, may be attracted to play in scums.
The presence of scums caused by cyanobacteria is a readily detected indicator of a high
risk of adverse health effects for those bathers who come into contact with the scum.
Immediate action to control scum contact is recommended for such situations.
The approach outlined in this section, however, does not cover all conceivable situations.
Swimmers may be in contact with benthic cyanobacteria after a storm breaks off clumps
of filaments, or cyanobacterial mats naturally detach from the sediment and are
accumulated on the shore (Edwards et al., 1992). Some marine beaches have been
reported to have widespread problems due to a benthic marine cyanobacterium,
Lyngbya majuscula, growing on rocks in tropical seas and causing severe blistering
when trapped under the bathing suits of people swimming following a storm (Grauer,
1961). This response may be due to acute toxicity; Lyngbya can produce irritant toxins.
Measures of cyanobacterial population cell density as outlined in Table 5.2, will not
detect these hazards. Instead, this type of hazard calls for critical and well-informed
observation of bathing sites, coupled with a flexible response.
It is difficult to define "safe" concentrations of cyanobacteria in recreational water in
relation to allergenic effects or skin reactions, because individual sensitivities vary
greatly. Aggravation of dermal reactions due to accumulation of cyanobacterial material
and enhanced disruption of cells under bathing suits and wet suits may be a problem,
even at all densities below the guidelines described above. Further information related to
monitoring and management of recreational waters is available in Bartram and Rees
(1999).
5.3 Other exposure routes
5.3.1 Renal dialysis
Renal dialysis patients are at great risk when water used for dialysis contains
contaminants such as cyanotoxins. For these patients large volumes of water (120 litres)
are used and the route of exposure is similar to the i.v. route, which allows for a much
greater uptake of toxin than following oral ingestion. One serious incident, including a
number of deaths arising from exposure through this route, has already been described
in section 4.1.
The WHO Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality (WHO, 1993) do not consider the
especially high quality of water needed for dialysis treatment, intravenous therapy or
other clinical uses. The treatment processes used at conventional surface water
treatment plants (such as coagulation, clarification and sand filtration) are normally
effective in removing cyanobacterial cells, but are not effective in removing or destroying
dissolved cyanotoxins, especially from water supplies with a high organic content and
cyanobacterial dominance (see Chapter 9). Consequently, clinics and hospitals with
special water needs, such as for dialysis treatment or for transfusions (intravenous
administration), may need to provide additional water treatment to remove the
cyanotoxins. Such treatment ranges from granular activated carbon filtration, followed by
reverse osmosis, to more elaborate treatment including membrane filtration (e.g. 25 µm
pore size filter). The extent of treatment necessary depends on the quality of the
municipal water supply.
Continuous monitoring of performance and equipment is essential to ensure adequate
quality of the water. On-site water treatment systems in clinics and hospitals require
rigorous monitoring and regular maintenance, including back-flushing of filters and
recharge of activated carbon, according to manufacturers' specifications. It is important
that manufacturers' specifications should be assessed for their adequacy for maintaining
performance under local conditions. Activated carbon, for example, may be exhausted
for its ability to remove cyanotoxins long before it reaches saturation for removal of other
organic compounds, and some manufacturers may be unaware of this.
Table 5.2 Guidelines for safe practice in managing bathing waters which may produce or
contain cyanobacterial cells and/or toxins
Guidance level or How guidance level
Health risks Recommended action
situation derived
Cyanobacterial scum Inference from oral Potential for acute Immediate action to
formation in bathing animal lethal poisoning prevent contact with
areas poisonings scums; possible
Potential for long-term prohibition of swimming
Actual human illness illness with some and other water-contact
case histories cyanobacterial species activities
Short-term adverse Public health follow-up
health outcomes, e.g. investigation
skin irritations,
gastrointestinal illness Inform relevant
authorities
100,000 cells From provisional Potential for long-term Watch for scums
cyanobacteria per ml drinking water illness with some
or 50 µg chlorophyll a guideline for cyanobacterial species Restrict bathing and
per litre with microcystin-LR, and further investigate
dominance of data concerning other Short-term adverse hazard
cyanobacteria cyanotoxins health outcomes, e.g.
skin irritations, Post on-site risk advisory
gastrointestinal illness signs Inform relevant
health authorities
20,000 cells From human bathing Short-term adverse Post on-site risk advisory
cyanobacteria per ml epidemiological study health outcomes, e.g. signs Inform relevant
or 10 µg chlorophyll a skin irritations, authorities
per litre with gastrointestinal illness,
dominance of probably at low
cyanobacteria frequency
5.3.2 Irrigation water
The use of water from sources containing cyanobacterial blooms and toxins for spray
irrigation of crops presents potential health hazards through several exposure routes,
including uptake into the food chain. Workers or passers-by may inhale toxins with spray
drift, and skin contact with cyanobacteria and dissolved toxins may also occur.
Questions therefore arise about the health significance of spray irrigation with water
containing cyanobacterial toxins. As shown in section 4.2, animal experimentation has
indicated that microcystin uptake through nasal mucosa may be considerable. When
considered together with the skin irritations, respiratory distress and nasal mucosal
irritations observed after recreational exposure (see sections 4.1 and 5.2.2), the
indicators are that occupational exposure to spray irrigation water should be avoided (by
appropriate work practices) if the water contains cyanobacterial toxins. Incidental
exposure of humans and animals to such spray irrigation water, for example by
downwind drift, should also be avoided.
There are several indications that terrestrial plants, including food crop plants, can take
up microcystins. Mustard seedling development is inhibited if microcystin-LR is
presented to the roots in aqueous solution (Kos et al., 1995). Microcystins have several
perturbatory effects on plant physiology and metabolism, when sufficient levels of toxin
enter the plant cells. Plant protein phosphatases show high susceptibility to inhibition by
microcystin-LR in vitro (MacKintosh et al., 1990). Plant sucrose metabolism is inhibited if
microcystin-LR is administered in solution by injection into the transpiration stream (Siegl
et al., 1990). Inhibition of whole leaf photosynthesis by French Bean plants occurred
after topical exposure of the leaves to an aqueous solution of microcystin-LR during
greenhouse studies (Abe et al., 1996). The degree of whole leaf photosynthesis
inhibition increased with subsequent brief exposures to the toxin in solution at 48-hour
intervals, eventually becoming irreversible. These results were observed at dissolved
microcystin-LR concentrations which can be found in untreated waters containing
cyanobacterial blooms (20 µg l-1 of toxin); leaf necrosis occurred at higher exposure
levels (Abe et al., 1996). The relevance of these findings for field situations is currently
unclear.
In addition to the possibility of internal accumulation of microcystins, irrigation may lead
to accumulation of toxins on the external surfaces of edible plant material. The toxins are
deposited when the water dries on the plant surface between irrigation periods or when
the water becomes trapped in the centres of, for example, salad plants. Further research
is needed into the uptake and fate of microcystins and other cyanobacterial toxins by
food plants and the persistence of the toxins on plant surfaces.
5.3.3 Cyanobacteria sold as dietary supplements
In some countries cyanobacteria are sold as dietary supplements, with the number of
users of these products estimated to be well over a million in North America alone.
Large-scale production of cyanobacteria and microalgae started some 50 years ago.
Much of the early research work dealt with the basic photosynthetic properties of
microalgae, their possible therapeutic, antibiotic and toxicological properties and their
potential as an agricultural commodity. The microalgae biomass industry now provides
significant biomass for pigments and speciality chemicals used primarily in the food
industry. The bulk of this microalgal biomass comes from two filamentous genera of
cyanobacteria: Spirulina including S. platensis and S. maxima (Belay et al., 1994) and
Aphanizomenon flos-aquae. While Spirulina is grown in artificial outdoor ponds, mainly
in southern California, Hawaii, Thailand, Taiwan and Japan, Aphanizomenon is at
present harvested from a natural lake. Production of food-grade Spirulina exceeds 1 ×
106 kg a-1 (Belay et al., 1993). Aphanizomenon production is also substantial.
As a consequence of the consumption of these products many quality control issues
arise. One such issue concerns the possible production of cyanotoxins by cyanobacterial
genera used for dietary supplements. In particular, Aphanizomenon flos-aquae has been
shown to be capable of producing saxitoxins (Mahmood and Carmichael, 1986) and the
neurotoxin anatoxin-a (Bumke-Vogt et al., 1999). While no saxitoxins have been
detected in Aphanizomenon flos-aquae marketed as a dietary supplement, it is
appropriate to monitor all supplements in order to ensure safety. In natural lakes,
mixtures of species often occur in cyanobacterial blooms. In particular Microcystis and
Anabaena, which usually contain microcystins, can both occur in association with
Aphanizomenon. The microcystins may then become part of the biomass harvested for
human consumption. Failure to monitor and regulate these toxins in cyanobacterial
biomass used as part of a human diet could lead to an increased risk for the consumer
(see Box 5.4).
5.3.4 Cyanobacteria and Vibrio cholerae
Islam (1991) described detection of Vibrio cholerae inside the mucilaginous sheath of
Anabaena variabilis for up to 15 months after artificial exposure and also noted that V.
cholerae 01 did not lose toxigenicity during the association (Islam, 1991). Field studies
have also detected V. cholerae in the mucilaginous sheath of Anabaena sp. from a pond
in Dhaka when it could not be detected in association with microalgae collected from the
same environment (Euglena sp. and Phacus sp. (Islam et al., 1994)).
The association between V. cholerae and cyanobacteria remains poorly understood, but
it has been noted that vibrios may produce mucinase (Schneider and Parker, 1982) and
it has been suggested that exchange of oxygen (from photosynthesis for aerobic
respiration) and carbon dioxide may permit a symbiotic relationship (Islam, 1987; Islam
et al., 1994). Other workers have noted that motile bacteria can easily discriminate
heterocysts from vegetative cells and attach to the heterocyst vegetative cell junction,
following which both host and epiphytes start growing (Paerl and Gallucci, 1985; Islam et
al., 1990). The bacteria rarely penetrate cyanobacterial cell walls (Islam et al., 1990).
Evidence is accumulating that association with mucilaginous cyanobacteria may be an
important factor in inter-epidemic survival of V. cholerae. The implications of this for the
control of cholera in humans remain unclear and it should be noted that the evidence
relates to mucilaginous cyanobacteria, and Anabaena in particular. No studies have
suggested or apparently investigated a relationship with cyanobacterial toxigenicity.
Box 5.4 Calculation of risk associated with consumption of cyanobacterial products
contaminated with microcystins
The State of Oregon, USA, has adopted 1 µg g-1 (1 ppm) of microcystins as a standard for
cyanobacterial products. The consumption of 2 g (as suggested by some producers) by a 60 kg
person of product containing 1 µg g-1 would result in a microcystin intake of 0.033 µg kg-1 bw. This
intake is slightly below the tolerable daily intake (TDI) of 0.04 µg kg-1 bw per day used for
derivation of the WHO guideline for microcystin-LR in drinking water (WHO, 1998) (see section
4.2). However, an intake exceeding 2 g per day of a product containing microcystins at a
concentration near the State of Oregon standard may exceed the TDI, and a consumption of 2 g
per day by children may also exceed the TDI because of their lower body weight. In deriving its
drinking water guideline value, WHO apportioned 20 per cent of intake to other sources. For
persons consuming cyanobacterial products, this apportionment may be inappropriate.
5.4 Tastes and odours
Cyanobacteria have, for a long time, been recognised as a nuisance in the drinking
water industry because of the ability of several taxa to produce earthy and musty
smelling compounds, notably geosmin and 2-methyl isoborneol (2-MIB), for which the
odour detection thresholds of less than 10 ng l-1 are remarkably low among sensitive
individuals.
The cyanobacterial genera that are known to produce geosmin are Anabaena,
Aphanizomenon, Lyngbya, Microcystis, Oscillatoria, Phormidium, Schizothrix and
Symploca (Perrson, 1983). All these (except Symploca) are also known to include toxin-
forming species and strains.
Because of this, the possibility of using odour compounds as an early warning for the
development of toxin-producing cyanobacteria blooms has been considered. However,
there is no evidence of a correlation between toxin production and the production of
taste- and odour-producing compounds that would provide a warning of toxicity.
Evidence from the literature on the capability of various cyanobacterial species to
produce both toxins and taste and odour compounds has been summarised by Kenefick
et al. (1992) and does not indicate that cyanobacterial species which produce toxins
invariably also produce taste and odour. Nevertheless, some characteristic tastes and
odours may indicate the presence of cyanobacteria, and toxic cyanobacteria frequently
occur without noticeable tastes or odours. In Alberta, Canada, 89 bloom samples from
10 lakes were analysed for the presence of microcystin-LR, and the taste and odour
compounds geosmin, 2-MIB and β-cyclocitral. The latter compound, which is only mildly
odorous compared with geosmin and 2-MIB, was reported to be produced in large
quantity by Microcystis spp. (Jüttner, 1988). The results showed that all but three of the
bloom samples had detectable levels of microcystin while none had detectable levels of
2-MIB. Several samples had detectable levels of geosmin, but there was no clear
relationship between the presence of geosmin and the presence of microcystin-LR. In
the case of β-cyclocitral, there was a significant correlation, at the 1 per cent level.
However, this relationship is of no practical use for providing early warning of the
presence of microcystin-LR, because the relationship is not consistent and β-cyclocitral
is not odorous enough to act as a sensitive surrogate for microcystin-LR (Hrudey et al.,
1993). Although there have been some rare occasions when cyanobacterial isolates
have been found to produce geosmin, microcystin and anatoxin-a simultaneously, as for
Anabaena lemmermannii from Lake Hallevann in Norway (Haneberg et al., 1994), such
reports are exceptions. The biochemical pathways to the biosynthesis of microcystin
(Dittmann et al., 1996), anatoxin (Gallon et al., 1989) and saxitoxin (Skimizu et al., 1984)
are becoming understood. These show no connection between toxin production and the
production of the alcohols geosmin and 2-MIB. It is therefore very unlikely that the
production of the taste and odour compounds are biochemically connected to the
production of the cyanotoxins.
Just as the presence of earthy or musty odours in water indicates the presence of
cyanobacteria and/or actinomycetes, taste and odour problems can be used as a
warning of the need for further investigation in the event that the occurrence of
cyanobacteria could result in the presence of cyanotoxins. It is, however, important to
recognise that the converse does not apply: lack of taste and odour by no means implies
the absence of cyanobacteria.
5.5 References
Abe, T., Lawson, T., Weyers, J.D.B. and Codd, G.A. 1996 Microcystin-LR inhibits
photosynthesis of Phaseolus vulgaris primary leaves: implications for current spray
irrigation practice. New Phytol., 133, 651-658.
Bartram, J. and Rees, G. 1999 Recreational Water Monitoring. E & FN Spon, London (In
Press).
Belay, A., Ota, Y., Miyakawa, K. and Shimamatsu, H. 1993 Current knowledge on
potential health benefits of Spirulina. J. Appl. Phycol., 5, 235-241.
Belay, A., Ota, Y., Miyakawa K. and Shimamatsu H. 1994 Production of high quality
Spirulina at Earthrise Farms. In: Phang et al. [Ed.] Algal Biotechnology in the Asia-
Pacific Region, 92-102.
Bumke-Vogt, C., Mailahn, W., Chorus, C. 1999 Anatoxin-a and neurotoxic cyanobacteria
in German lakes and reservoirs. Env. Toxicol. Water Qual., 14, In Press.
Cohen, S.G. and Reif, C.B. 1953 Cutaneous sensitisation to blue-green algae. J. Allergy.
24, 452-457.
Dittmann, E., Meissner, K. and Borner, T. 1996 Conserved sequences of peptide
synthetase genes in the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa. Phycologia, 35(6), 62-
67.
Edwards, C., Beattie, K.A., Scrimgeour, C. and Codd, G.A. 1992 Identification of
anatoxin-a in benthic cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) and in associated dog poisonings
at Loch Insh, Scotland. Toxicon, 30, 1165-1175.
Fitzgeorge, R.B., Clark, S.A. and Keevil, C.W. 1994 Routes of intoxication. In: G.A. Codd,
T.M. Jefferies, C.W. Keevil and E. Potter. [Eds] Detection Methods for Cyanobacterial
Toxins. The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK, 69-74.
Gallon, J.R., Khadije, C.N. and Brown, E.G. 1989 Biosynthesis of the tropane-related
cyanobacterial toxin anatoxin-a: role of ornithine decarboxylase. Phytochemistry, 29,
1107-1111.
Grauer, F. 1961 Seaweed dermatitis. Arch. Dermatol., 84, 720-732.
Haneberg, B., Hanssen, T.R., Ringdal, E. 1994 Hallevannet. Toksisk algeoppblomstring i
en oligotrof innsjø. Telemark distrikshøgskole, Bø, Thesis.
Hrudey, S.E., Kenefick, S.L., Best, N., Gillespie, T., Kotak, B.G., Prepas, E.E. and
Peterson, H.G. 1993 Liver toxins and odour agents in cyanobacterial blooms in Alberta
surface water supplies. In: Disinfection Dilemma: Microbiological Control Versus By-
Products. Proc. 5th National Conference on Drinking Water. Winnipeg, American Water
Works Association, 383-390.
IPCS 1984 Aquatic Marine and Freshwater Biotoxins. Environmental Health Criteria 37,
International Programme on Chemical Safety, World Health Organization, Geneva.
Islam, M.S. 1987 Studies of aquatic flora as possible reservoirs of toxigenic Vibrio
cholerae 01. PhD Thesis, Faculty of Medicine, University of London.
Islam, M.S. 1991 Toxigenicity and Toxin genes of Vibrio cholerae 01 Isolated from an
Artificial Aquatic Environment. World Microbiol. Biotechnol., 7, 269-271.
Islam, M.S., Drasar, B.S. and Bradley, D.J. 1990 Long-term persistence of toxigenic
Vibrio cholerae 01 in the mucilagenous sheath of a blue-green alga Anabeana variabilis.
J. Trop. Med. Hygiene, 93, 396-401.
Islam, M.S., Miah, M.A., Hasan, M.K., Sack, R.B. and Albert, M.J. 1994 Detection of
non-culturable Vibrio cholerae 01 in a blue-green alga from aquatic environment in
Bangladesh. Trans. Royal Soc. Tropical Med. Hyg., 88, 298-299.
Jüttner, F. 1988 Biochemistry of biogenic off-flavour compounds in surface water. Wat.
Sci. Technol., 20, 107-116.
Kos, P., Gorzo, G., Suranyi, G. and Borbely, G. 1995 Simple and efficient method for
isolation and measurement of cyanobacterial hepatotoxins by plant tests (Sinapis alba
L.). Analyt. Biochem., 225, 49-53.
Kenefick, S.L., Hrudey, S.E., Prepas, E.E., Motkosky, N. and Peterson, H.G. 1992
Odorous substances and cyanobacterial toxins in prairie drinking water sources. Wat.
Sci. Tech., 25(2), 147-154.
MacKintosh, C., Beattie, K.A., Klumpp, S., Cohen, P. and Codd, G.A. 1990
Cyanobacterial microcystin-LR is a potent and specific inhibitor of protein phosphatases
1 and 2A from both mammals and higher plants. FEBS Letters, 264, 187-192.
Mahmood, N.A. and Carmichael, W.W. 1986 Paralytic shellfish poisons produced by the
freshwater cyanobacterium Aphanizomenon flos-aquae NH-5. Toxicon, 24(2), 175-186.
Paerl, H.W. and Gallucci, K.K. 1985 Role of chemotaxis in establishing a specific
nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterial-bacterial association. Science, 227, 647-649.
Persson, P.E. 1983 Off-flavors in aquatic ecosystems - An introduction. Wat. Sci.
Technol., 15, 1-11.
Pilotto, L.S., Douglas, R.M., Burch, M.D., Cameron, S., Beers, M., Rouch, G.R.,
Robinson, P., Kirk, M., Cowie, C.T., Hardiman, S., Moore, C. and Attewell, R.G. 1997
Health effects of recreational exposure to cyanobacteria (blue-green) during recreational
water-related activities. Aust. N. Zealand J. Public Health, 21, 562-566.
Shimizu, Y., Norte, M., Hori, A., Genenah, A., Kobayashi, M. 1984 Biosynthesis of
saxitoxin analogues: The unexpected pathway. Am. Chem. Soc., 106, 6433-6434.
Siegl, G., MacKintosh, C. and Stitt, M. 1990 Sucrose-phosphate synthetase is
dephosphorylated by protein phosphatase 2A in spinach leaves. FEBS Letters, 270,
198-202.
Turner, P.C., Gammie, A.J., Hollinrake, K. and Codd, G.A. 1990 Pneumonia associated
with contact with cyanobacteria. Brit. Med. J., 300, 1440-1441.
WHO 1993 Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality, Second edition. Volume 1,
Recommendations. World Health Organization, Geneva.
WHO 1996 Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality, Second edition. Volume 2, Health
Criteria and Other Supporting Information. World Health Organization, Geneva.
WHO 1998 Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality. Second edition, Addendum to Volume
2, Health Criteria and Other Supporting Information. World Health Organization, Geneva.
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health consequences,
monitoring and management
Edited by Ingrid Chorus and Jamie Bartram
© 1999 WHO
ISBN 0-419-23930-8
Chapter 6. SITUATION ASSESSMENT, PLANNING AND
MANAGEMENT
This chapter was prepared by Jamie Bartram, Mike Burch, Ian R. Falconer, Gary Jones
and Tine Kuiper-Goodman
Chapters 3 and 4 of this volume present evidence that cyanobacterial toxins can and do
cause significant adverse health effects. These effects are associated with the
occurrence of cyanobacterial blooms. As described in Chapter 2, such blooms are a
natural occurrence, but occur more frequently in waters which have been subject to
certain forms of human interference. The most important types of interference are
enrichment of waters with nutrients (eutrophication) from point sources such as
municipal wastewater outlets and non-point sources such as agriculture, and the
damming of rivers (which increases retention time and exposure to sunlight). Chapter 2
also describes how, although blooms are more frequent and severe in eutrophic waters,
they may occur in waters which would be considered in many world regions to be of
good or acceptable quality. Of more concern is the fact that the available evidence
concerning trends in eutrophication indicates that the situation is severe world-wide (see
Table 6.1), although it is improving in some regions whilst deteriorating in others.
The purpose of this chapter is to assist those concerned with assessing or managing the
potential risks to human health arising from toxic cyanobacteria. It is intended to serve
as a guide to readers who are confronted with immediate questions and issues related to
risk management, whether arising from an event or because of the suspicion of a
potential hazard. It also provides an axis to assist the reader in using other parts of this
book and deals with four major areas:
• The overall risk management framework.
• Situation assessment (Is there a problem? Would a problem be detected if it existed?
How can the severity of the problem be interpreted in relation to other demands on
resources?).
• Management options (What types of management actions are available? What are
their basic characteristics?).
• Planning for management (How should a management, contingency or emergency
response and investigation plan be put together?).
Table 6.1 Perceived eutrophication problem in different continents and countries
Reservoirs, rivers Marine
Natural Estuaries, lagoons
Region/country and irrigation coastal
lakes and closed areas
systems waters
AFRICA
Central + ++ +
North + ++ +
South ++
CENTRAL AMERICA
Caribbean + + +
Guatemala/Nicaragua +
Mexico + ++
NORTH AMERICA
Canada ++ + +
USA ++ ++ ++ +
SOUTH AMERICA
Argentina/Chile + ++ + +
Brazil + ++ ++ +
Columbia/Ecuador/Peru + ++ + +
Venezuela/Suriname + + ++
ASIA
China ++ + +
India/Pakistan + ++ +
Indochina + +
Indonesia/Philippines ++ +
Japan ++ + ++ +
OCEANIA
Australia/New Zealand ++ ++ ++ +
EUROPE (EU countries)
Belgium +
Denmark ++ +
France ++ + ++
F. Germany, Fed. Rep. ++ ++ + +
Greece + + +
Ireland ++ +
Italy ++ ++ + ++
Netherlands ++ ++
Portugal ++ +
Spain ++ +
UK ++ ++
EUROPE (other countries)
Austria ++
Former Czechoslovakia +
Finland ++ + +
Former German Dem. + ++ + +
Rep.
Hungary + +
Norway ++ + ++ +
Poland ++ +
Romania +
Sweden ++ + ++
Switzerland ++
Former USSR + ++ + +
Former Yugoslavia +
+ Identified problems
++ Serious problems
Source: Adapted from Earthwatch, 1992
6.1 The risk-management framework
Risk management is a relatively recent discipline, in which developments are still
occurring very rapidly. Various model schemes for risk management have been
portrayed, most of which have some common elements. These include the need for an
information base upon which to make decisions; the need to make decisions based on
often inadequate information; the need to compare and "value" different and often very
diverse outcomes with one another; and the need for broad participation in the process
in all its stages. One schematic example is presented in Figure 6.1. This representation
is different from many others because it completes a circle, showing the feedback of
policy evaluation into hazard identification and prioritisation, and thereby into improved
risk assessment and eventually into implementation of revised (improved) policy. It also
places communication as a central and two-way process, indicating that it has an
important role throughout risk management.
The implementation of risk management will vary greatly according to the political, social
and economic context in which it takes place. Whilst it is often seen as a highly rational
process, it should be recognised that the scientific basis for many of its elements is
actually often extremely weak (the status of knowledge regarding some of the
cyanobacterial toxins as outlined in Chapters 3 and 4 is a good example of this) and
procedures for valuation of health effects are generally poorly developed. More
importantly, no scientific assessment will support effective risk management if it fails to
address the perceptions and priorities of the society concerned. Public acceptance of
cyanobacterial-related turbidity and discoloration in recreational waters in some
countries illustrates this point. Thus, a commitment to communication and participation is
an essential element of any effective risk management plan.
Figure 6.1 The risk management cycle (Adapted from Soby et al., 1993)
The movement towards a more comprehensive approach to risk management is
inhibited by four key impediments, sometimes referred to as "institutional failures"
(adapted from Gerrard, 1995):
• Data limitations are of two kinds: a lack of historical record on which to base current
change and to recognise trends, and the inadequacy of scientific understanding on
which to base judgements about cause and consequence. Such data limitations are
common in the management of cyanobacterial and eutrophication problems. A common
question that faces water managers is whether a cyanobacterial problem is getting
worse, due for example to cultural eutrophication, or whether the problem has always
been present but has remained unnoticed or, perhaps, unreported. Following
widespread dissemination of information concerning the potential toxicity of
cyanobacteria, blooms may start to be reported more frequently by, or to, relevant
authorities.
• Poor frameworks for analysis impede comprehensiveness in assessment and decision-
making necessary to make informed judgements. Cyanobacteria are good examples.
Until recently, a general lack of knowledge and poor communication by scientists were a
serious impediment to sound management action - a constraint which is now being
overcome in some countries.
• Inadequate regulatory principles which lay too much discretion at the door of the safety
official and which lead to discrepancies in levels of safety provided for different groups in
society (according to their environmental circumstances and income levels). In some
countries, cyanobacteria-infested drinking water sources are the only ones available to
the poor or geographically isolated.
• Insufficient consultation procedures restrict participation of different interests that have
a legitimate role to play in the determination of risk and its management (the important
role of multi-agency and vested interest committees or "task forces" in the effective
management of toxic cyanobacterial blooms is outlined in section 7.1). Lack of
communication between government and industry sectors (including, for example, water
suppliers) is especially detrimental in managing cyanotoxin issues. For example, health
impact assessment generally requires health sector participation, resource management
is generally under the control of environmental and/or local authorities, and abatements
such as water treatment may be undertaken by local authorities or the private sector.
6.1.1 Communication and participation
In many cultures, certain characteristics lead to some risks being perceived as high
priorities (that is they are little accepted or tolerated). These include:
• Risks which are "new" or unfamiliar to the population.
• Risks which are perceived to have been caused by a (especially distant and
unaccountable) third party.
• Risks for which the consequences are poorly characterised and understood.
• Risks with potentially widespread or catastrophic and irreversible consequences.
• Risks outside the control of the individual.
• Risks in which the population or individual has had little possibility of influencing official
responses.
Risks with these characteristics are perceived as high priorities when compared with
other risks which are perhaps of equal or greater importance to health but which are
voluntarily undertaken and familiar. The example of the social acceptance of smoking
across much of the globe, despite widespread knowledge of the adverse health effects
associated with it, is a good example of this.
A brief review of the public perception of cyanobacteria as a health hazard indicates that
they will often be perceived as a high priority, perhaps higher than rational analysis of
the (limited) available data would otherwise indicate. Newspaper headlines have been
printed proclaiming "Water More Toxic Than Cyanide" after cyanobacteria were found in
a particular water body. While cyanotoxins are, on a per-unit-mass basis, more toxic
than cyanide, this does not mean that drinking water containing a low concentration of
cyanotoxins is anywhere near as dangerous as drinking a lethal solution of cyanide, as
the newspaper headline implied. Being a "new" issue, with which the general population
is not familiar, the blame may be assigned to municipalities, public service utilities, or
farmers. Individual choice does not enable risk avoidance (at least for drinking water
exposure) and entire communities may be affected through their drinking water supply.
Experience indicates that, in some countries, public concern regarding cyanobacteria
has often been greater than the corresponding concern from the professional community.
In other countries exactly the opposite perception exists - the public has become
accustomed to "green" or "smelly" water and may disbelieve scientific warnings of risk.
Improved understanding of risk assessment and management, and an improving
understanding of effective intervention, has demonstrated that differences in public and
professional perceptions are not an error by either party that needs to be corrected (for
example through attempts at altering public perception or discrediting scientific attempts
to assess objectively and to describe risks), but are legitimate viewpoints to be taken into
account through open channels of communication and especially through enabling
public participation in risk management. It should be recalled that the factors which lead
to a low public tolerance of risk often include the lack of familiarity (i.e. the "newness")
and the inability to exert influence. Effective communication and provision of
mechanisms for participation will, therefore, often address these directly.
Several sections of this book provide guidance concerning public participation and
communication in relation to cyanobacterial hazards. These actions are an important
aspect of all types of planning, whether for preventive management (section 6.4.1), for
contingency planning (section 6.4.2) or planning in response to an incident (section
6.4.3). They are also discussed in more detail in Chapter 7.
6.1.2 Hazard identification and hazard characterisation
In the context of risk management, a hazard is usually understood to mean the property
of a substance (or activity) to cause harm. Many substances are hazardous but will not
necessarily lead to harm unless circumstances lead to human exposure. Even after
exposure, an adverse health outcome is not necessarily certain, but rather a probability.
A hazard is therefore defined as an intrinsic property of a biological, chemical or physical
agent to cause adverse health effects under specific conditions. This definition implies
some certainty that under similar conditions the agent will cause similar adverse health
effects.
The term "risk" refers to a probability that exposure to a hazard will lead to a specific
(adverse) health outcome and is usually expressed as a frequency in a given time. Thus,
for example, the WHO Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality (WHO, 1993) define
guideline values as concentrations of specific chemicals estimated to lead to a negligible
additional risk for the consuming population. Where such a point of reference is adopted,
it is generally referred to as the "acceptable risk", although the term "tolerable risk" is
preferred by some people (because the risk is never really acceptable, but it is tolerated).
Hazard identification involves the identification of known or potential adverse health
effects associated with a particular agent, based on studies conducted under specific
conditions, such as the species tested and the experimental conditions. Epidemiological
studies and animal toxicity studies are ranked as providing the greatest predictive
information, and this is followed by in vitro (test tube) assays and qualitative structure
activity relationships (QSAR) predictions.
Hazard characterisation is the extrapolation phase of risk assessment aimed at making a
predictive characterisation of the hazard to humans based on animal studies (species
extrapolation) under low exposure conditions (extrapolation from high to low dose). The
endpoint of hazard characterisation is the estimation of a "safe dose" such as a tolerable
daily intake (TDI) or equivalent. In general, TDIs are only determined when there is likely
to be a threshold in the relationship between dose and effect, based in part on
theoretical knowledge of the mechanism of action. For genotoxic carcinogens it has
been accepted that there is no threshold dose below which effects, such as initiation of
the carcinogenic process, will not occur. When such chemicals cannot be completely
avoided (such as some natural toxicants and contaminants), mathematical models (most
of which presume linearity at low doses) have been used to estimate, through
extrapolation, the possibility of adverse effects at low doses. The dose corresponding to
a risk level of 1 in 1 × 105 or 1 in 1 × 106 has been considered as posing a negligible or
tolerable risk.
With cyanotoxins, risk assessment is made more difficult by the paucity of scientifically-
sound toxicological and epidemiological studies (see Chapter 4). The available animal
data are limited, particularly in the case of chronic or long-term effects of cyanotoxins.
The lack of data is reflected in the fact that a WHO guideline has been agreed only for
one group of cyanotoxins (i.e. the microcystins, see Chapter 5) and only as a provisional
guideline value for the toxin most commonly studied (i.e. microcystin-LR). Uncertainties
about the environmental fate of cyanotoxins (for example, to what extent the toxins are
accumulated in fish and shellfish that may be consumed by humans, see Chapter 3) add
to the difficulty.
6.1.3 Exposure assessment and risk characterisation
Exposure assessment can relate to exposure to cyanobacterial toxins during an
outbreak of disease, or it can be an assessment of the likely exposure of people through
consuming drinking water or swimming in lakes known to contain certain levels of
cyanotoxins or cyanobacteria.
Risk characterisation is the qualitative and/or quantitative estimation, including the
attendant uncertainties, of the severity and probable occurrence or absence of known or
potential adverse health effects in an exposed population. This estimation is based on
hazard identification, hazard characterisation and exposure assessment. If it is
calculated as the "probable risk" (such as the number of persons in a population that are
expected to get cancer from exposure to a toxic chemical), the estimated risk takes on
more meaning than it deserves, because of uncertainties in the process. Alternatively,
risk characterisation can be taken as establishing levels of daily exposure over a lifetime
at which the risk is "negligible" (see section 4.2).
6.1.4 Policy development
The processes of hazard identification, hazard characterisation, exposure assessment
and risk characterisation may be readily viewed as rational, scientific activities. In
contrast, policy development takes account of both rational assessment and societal
values. It therefore requires the valuation of a specific health outcome (such as skin rash,
gastro-enteritis, cancer or death). Most definitions of risk assessment therefore combine
a frequency estimation with some valuation of the seriousness of the consequences.
Whilst several approaches have been proposed for the rational comparison of the
"value" of different adverse health outcomes it should be recalled that such valuation is
principally driven by public perception and societal concerns, and rational analysis may
be of very limited relevance. Experience with the enforcement of recreational water
quality standards leading to restrictions on bathing has shown that public reaction may
vary between the extremes of proclaiming that "there is nothing wrong with the water, we
have been swimming in it for years without any illness, the authorities do not know what
they are talking about" to "this water has killed a pet dog and must be doing me harm too
- something must be done about it immediately".
Knowledge of the characteristics of a hazard, the local occurrence of the hazardous
conditions and an assessment of the seriousness of the outcomes of exposure, provides
the basis for development of policy. However, other factors should be considered. These
may include: the seriousness of other hazards and associated health outcomes that
might compete for limited resources; the cost and effectiveness of remedial and
preventative actions; and the availability of technical solutions and of experience in their
application in the country or region. For effective policy development the above-
mentioned factors must be brought together. In most circumstances this is best done in
a forum which enables participation of all concerned parties including, for example,
water utilities, professional associations, public representatives and experts in the topic
under consideration (see section 7.1).
6.1.5 Policy implementation
One of the most frequent failures of policy development is the formulation of legislation
in the absence of consideration of its sound and sustainable implementation. In the field
of water supply, there has been an increasing recognition by governments of the general
need to ensure availability of water supplies, rather than costly treatment only for
favoured localities.
A number of actions are available to governments with which to support policy
implementation, the most obvious being regulatory enforcement. This implies a capacity
to monitor the implementation of the regulations and a will to enforce compliance when
the regulations are not met. Other mechanisms for implementation include voluntary
codes, conflict resolution, economic instruments and public information and participation
(see Chapter 7). Most frequently, multiple actions will be used and will interact with one
another to encourage safer behaviours and practices.
6.1.6 Evaluation of management plans and actions
The types of actions described above should, ideally, be combined in appropriate
preventative, remedial and contingency plans according to local circumstances and
should constitute part of a declared policy for control of adverse human health impacts
from cyanobacteria. Thus, they would be integrated into water sector policy more
generally, established at national level and operated at local levels supported by
legislative frameworks, trained staff and effective institutions with proactive strategies for
awareness raising and information dissemination (see Chapter 7).
These plans must be periodically reviewed. In particular, after an incident, it is useful to
reflect on the parts of the contingency plan that worked well and those parts that did not
function effectively. With long-term, preventative or remedial management actions it is
crucial to put in place a system of monitoring that will enable the efficacy of the actions
to be evaluated. There may be long delays before any benefit of a management action is
perceived in lakes and reservoirs - in some cases 5-10 years or longer.
It is important to consider the tenets and principles of Adaptive Environmental
Management (AEM), particularly with long-term management actions. Decisions and
actions are often made on the best available advice, recognising that with any complex
ecological problem, such as with a toxic cyanobacterial bloom, the information available
to guide a specific management action will always be limited and inadequate. It is
important, therefore, to monitor the outcome of the management action, and then to
modify or revise the action depending upon the response, or as new scientific
information and techniques become available.
6.2 Situation assessment
Assessing the risk posed by toxic cyanobacteria, or the potential for development of
cyanobacterial blooms, and linking this to effective measures for the protection of public
health within available resources, is complex. Situation assessment may be proactive,
for example to determine whether contingency planning is required or to inform long-
term action, such as pollution control to minimise bloom formation; or it may be reactive,
for example to assist in interpretation of specific local events or conditions to inform
emergency or incident response.
An important factor in situation assessment is understanding the adequacy of available
information with which to make the assessment. In many, if not all, cases
epidemiological evidence of cyanobacteria-related health effects would not be available
because of poor or non-standardised, or poorly differentiated, diagnoses; lack of
awareness of cyanotoxins as potential causes of symptoms; and inadequate reporting
systems, research programmes, or information analysis. In most situations a limited
range of information is available to assist in identifying whether a problem or potential
problem exists. The types of information possibly available to aid in assessment are
summarised in Table 6.2.
6.2.1 Drinking water supply information
The monitoring of water bodies and supply systems for cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins is
not yet common practice in most countries in the world. There are a number of critical
control points in the potable water supply system where testing for cyanotoxins and
intact cyanobacterial cells should be carried out if significant cyanobacterial populations
occur in the source water. These may include the water storage reservoir or river; the
treatment plant raw water intake; key points in the treatment process; and in the final
treated drinking water, depending on local circumstances. Details of such critical points
are given in Table 5.1 with more detailed monitoring information being provided in
Chapters 10-13.
One requirement is to be aware of which members of the community receive drinking
water from which water supply. This information is usually readily available in cities and
large towns but this may not be the case in rural areas. In addition, the existence of
water treatment systems and their effectiveness in cyanotoxin removal (see Chapter 9)
should be ascertained. For small community supplies there may be little or no water
treatment, and this must be taken into account by health authorities when assessing any
potential risk situation.
To aid in making a rapid situation assessment based on available water supply
information, and critical control points as outlined in Table 5.1, the protection categories
outlined in Figure 6.2 should be consulted. This schematic flow diagram may be
particularly useful in those countries and regions where little or no consideration has
been given previously to the potential risk posed by toxic cyanobacteria in drinking water
supplies. The flow diagram focuses on the raw water supply and treatment stream, with
attention being paid to the likelihood of toxin release from intact cells (either in the
storage reservoir or during the transport network to the treatment plant), removal of
intact cells (and their toxins), and the capacity for removal or destruction of dissolved
cyanotoxins.
Table 6.2 Types of information of assistance to assess whether a health problem from a
cyanobacterial bloom exists or is likely in a particular water body
Observation Sources of information Management options
Potential for bloom Water quality monitoring data (nutrients, Basis for proactive
formation temperature, etc.) management
History of bloom formation Cyanobacterial blooms may follow marked Can inform proactive
seasonal and annual patterns management
Monitoring of Turbidity, discolouration, cell microscopic Possible only during
cyanobacteria and/or identification, cell counts and toxin analysis event and enables only
cyanotoxins provide increasingly reliable information reactive management
"Scum scouting" In areas of high public interest the general Possible only during
public and untrained agency staff may play event and enables only
a role in identifying and reporting obvious reactive management
hazards such as scums
Reporting of animal Requires both volition and a mechanism Possible only during
deaths and human illness for data collection which may not exist event and informs only
reactive management
Epidemiological detection Requires both effective reporting and Normally well after an
of disease patterns in the large-scale effects before detection likely event; can inform future
human population management strategies
6.2.2 Recreational water information
Assessing the potential hazard at recreational water bodies is complicated by the
numerous points at which people may enter or move around the water and by the
heterogeneous and often rapidly changing distributions of cyanobacterial populations,
particularly scums which may be blown around by the wind. As noted in section 5.2.2,
concentrated scums pose the greatest risk to bathers. However, monitoring of their
potentially rapid formation and dispersal, as well the monitoring of all water bodies used
for recreational purposes, is rarely likely to be achievable, nor is it appropriate unless
conditions indicate otherwise. Therefore, additional approaches to assessing
cyanobacterial risks at recreational sites are needed.
Figure 6.2 Simple and rapid assessment of the degree of protection afforded by
drinking water supply systems. Note that this figure should be used with, rather
than instead of, more detailed health investigations
Visual monitoring for scums around bathing areas considered to be at-risk is crucial for
protecting human health and is quite easy to perform (see Chapters 11 and 12).
Operators of recreational sites can be involved in assessing changes of situation.
Furthermore, participation of the public in monitoring for cyanobacteria, and particularly
for scums, is a very effective approach (see Table 6.2 under "scum scouting"). This
involves education on appearance and toxicity of scums, as well as on recognition of
cyanobacteria at high cell densities when they do not form scums (see Chapter 7). An
example of a message to convey this may be:
"If you walk into the water up to your knees, carefully, without stirring up sediment, and
cannot see your feet because of a greenish discoloration, don't swim and inform the
local authority using the following telephone number".
In many countries and regions, the current situation is that public awareness is negligible
and knowledge of the risk posed by bathing in cyanobacterial scums is lacking. Eye
witness accounts in Australia, Germany and Japan report swimmers deliberately
covering themselves in cyanobacterial scum for the sake of an "exciting" photograph,
and one well-documented poisoning case in the UK resulted from army cadets
undertaking kayak "Eskimo rolls" in cyanobacterial scum. If public education not only
addresses personal health risk but also stimulates a sense of responsibility in reporting
scums, valuable support for risk assessment at recreational sites can be gained (see
Chapter 7).
6.2.3 Environmental information
Environmental information, including physical, chemical and biological data can aid in
the prediction and assessment of the likelihood, or presence, of cyanobacterial mass
developments, including blooms, scums and mats. It can also help predict and assess
types of cyanobacterial toxins and their location.
Historical records and local knowledge
Consultation of historical records, if available, can indicate whether a water body has
been prone to cyanobacterial bloom development. Useful information is sometimes
available from the local community, including descriptions of the water body and
examples of human health incidents, livestock mortalities and fish-kills associated with
blooms and scums. However, a lack of historical and local evidence of blooms cannot be
taken as assurance that cyanobacterial blooms have not occurred, or will not occur,
because data may be lacking and recognition of cyanobacterial blooms and associated
problems may have been inadequate (Skulberg et al., 1984) and because increases in
cultural eutrophication may be ongoing.
Physical data
Environments in which various species of cyanobacteria can flourish, together with the
physical conditions that promote such developments are outlined in Chapter 2. In the
case of the many species of planktonic cyanobacteria whose growth is favoured in warm,
thermally-stratified environments, the onset of favourable growth conditions is indicated
by a rise in surface water temperature above about 18 °C and the establishment of
persistent thermal stratification (Reynolds, 1984; NRA, 1990). For example, the
Queensland Department of Natural Resources in Australia undertook a two-year survey
of thermal stratification in its major water supply reservoirs to aid in its assessment of
reservoirs potentially at risk of developing cyanobacterial blooms. The study enabled
reservoirs to be categorised as seasonally strongly stratified, weakly stratified or well
mixed, with the strongly stratified bodies being considered most at risk. In addition, the
seasonal timing and persistence of stratification was used as a trigger to increase
monitoring effort (i.e. as an indicator of when to switch from monthly to fortnightly or
weekly sampling) (Chudek et al., 1998).
Hydraulic mixing and transport processes
The ratio between the depth of the mixed layer and the depth to which sufficient light for
photosynthesis penetrates, strongly influences cyanobacterial mass development and
the extent to which the populations may be dominated by particular cyanobacterial types.
Data on flushing rates in lakes as well as river flow rates are useful because planktonic
cyanobacteria do not usually attain high population densities in highly flushed
environments with retention times (i.e. the time it takes for the water volume to be
exchanged once) of less than 5-10 days, or in the open channels of flowing rivers. If river
flows are reduced due to drought and/or excessive abstraction of water, cyanobacterial
bloom development can be anticipated provided nutrient concentrations and light
penetration are adequate (e.g. Bowling and Baker, 1996). Section 2.3 on cyanobacterial
"ecostrategists" provides further details of this, together with section 8.5 on the
hydrophysical control of cyanobacteria.
Chemical data
The mass development of cyanobacteria is dependent on the nutrient concentrations
(especially phosphorus and nitrogen) in a water body. The relationship between mean
chlorophyll a concentrations (as a simple measure of cyanobacterial and planktonic algal
biomass) and annual mean phosphorus concentrations provides a valuable (but easily
misused) basis for assessing the likelihood of planktonic biomass development; this is
discussed critically in Chapter 8 (Vollenweider, 1968; Vollenweider and Kerekes, 1980).
Inputs and concentrations of nitrate and ammonia should also be considered because
these can influence growth rates, maximum biomass and phytoplankton species
composition. The ability of several toxigenic cyanobacterial genera to fix dissolved
atmospheric nitrogen under aerobic conditions (e.g. Anabaena, Aphanizomenon,
Nodularia), but not others (e.g. Microcystis, Oscillatoria, emphasises the need to take
physical, chemical and biological factors into account when attempting to predict the
likelihood of cyanobacterial mass development.
Biological data
Long-term and within-year monitoring records are useful in contributing to the
assessment of the likelihood, onset and persistence of cyanobacterial mass
developments. Such long-term data sets are not widely available, and often their value
may not be apparent to managers who may see long-term monitoring as difficult to
justify. This may be the case particularly in water bodies that have no history of
cyanobacterial problems. Health authorities responsible for the quality of recreational
waters and drinking water resources in many countries may not be sufficiently informed
of data available in environmental authorities or local research institutions. Establishing
such contacts is strongly recommended for assessing potential cyanobacterial risks.
In addition to monitoring for total phytoplankton biomass (measured by cell counts or as
chlorophyll a concentration) and cyanobacterial genera or species distribution and
numbers (see Chapter 12), information on other biota in the reservoir, lake or river can
be useful. This could include the types and abundance of phytoplankton grazers
(zooplankton) and of zooplanktivorous fish (see section 8.5 for details).
6.2.4 Health information
Information on the health of the population is collected in nearly all countries for the
purpose of providing assistance in the prevention and control of disease. Often included
in this information are records of outbreaks of gastro-enteritis and, where possible, their
causes. Most sources of gastro-enteritis are infectious organisms, although in most
cases of gastro-enteritis a specific cause is not identified. When a substantial outbreak
of gastro-enteritis occurs it will generally be investigated in order to determine the source
and the causative organisms. Faecal, food and water samples may be screened for a
variety of possible pathogens, and only if no pathogens have been identified will the
possibility of toxicity in the water or food be investigated. As awareness of
cyanobacterial toxicity increases, the likelihood of these toxins being considered as a
possible cause for clinical illness increases.
Routine monitoring for the presence of cyanobacterial cells or cyanotoxins in drinking
water is undertaken in only a few countries at present, and then only by some water
supply companies or authorities. In those countries where there is an awareness of the
problem, monitoring of reservoirs after the onset of a cyanobacterial bloom has been
detected is more common. As a result of the absence of routine monitoring, reports of
gastro-enteritis outbreaks that have been later attributed to cyanobacterial poisoning
have been made in the absence of cell counts or toxin measurement at the time of the
event (for examples see section 4.1).
It is unlikely that an outbreak of illness will be related to cyanobacteria in the drinking or
bathing water unless a specific local investigation is conducted. A link between data
gathered by health authorities and cyanobacterial data obtained from water monitoring
will be required if acute gastro-enteritis caused by cyanotoxins is to be understood and
avoided. This may be established by the reporting of monitoring data collected by water
supply agencies to health authorities. In outbreaks of gastro-enteritis in which no
pathogen has been detected, it may be useful to look at the geographical distribution of
cases to see whether the drinking water distribution system is the likely source.
Investigation of the presence of cyanotoxins can follow (if still present), or proactive
investigation for a subsequent bloom can be introduced.
Until cyanobacterial monitoring and cyanotoxin analysis are more widely established, it
will remain difficult to correlate clinical findings with the toxic effects of cyanobacteria.
6.2.5 Other data
In addition to the drinking water, recreational water environment and health information
that may assist in developing a situation assessment, additional information may be
gleaned from veterinary records of animal deaths and post mortem examinations (see
Chapter 4 for likely symptoms and pathologies). While in many cases it may not be
possible to attribute unequivocally animal deaths, or even poor water quality, to toxic
cyanobacteria, consistent relationships between these observations and particular water
bodies at certain times of the year may be indicative of water bodies with potential
cyanobacterial problems.
6.3 Management actions, the Alert Levels Framework
An Alert Levels Framework is a monitoring and management action sequence that water
treatment plant operators and managers can use to provide a graduated response to the
onset and progress of a cyanobacterial bloom. Circumstances and operational
alternatives will vary depending upon the source of the water supply and the analytical
and water treatment facilities available. The managerial response model, presented as a
"decision tree" in Figure 6.3, is based upon the critical control points identified in Table
5.1, the drinking water supply protection categories defined in Figure 6.2, and on an alert
levels framework developed earlier in Australia. The decision tree should be seen as a
general framework, recognising that it may be appropriate to adapt specific alert levels
and actions to suit local conditions in different countries.
The decision tree provides for the assessment of a potentially toxic cyanobacterial bloom,
with appropriate actions and responses, through three "threshold" stages. The sequence
of response levels is based upon the initial detection of cyanobacteria at the Vigilance
Level, progressing to moderate to high cyanobacterial numbers and possible detection
of toxins above guideline concentrations at Alert Level 1. Alert Level 1 conditions require
decisions to be made about the suitability of treated drinking water based on the efficacy
of water treatment and the concentrations of toxins detected (if such measurements can
be made). At very high cyanobacterial biomass levels in raw water, the potential health
risks associated with treatment system failure, or the inability to implement effective
treatment systems at all, are significantly increased. This justifies progression to a
heightened risk situation denoted by Alert Level 2 conditions.
The framework has been developed largely from the perspective of the drinking water
supply operator but is also important for the manager of the raw water supply. The
actions accompanying each level cover categories such as additional sampling and
testing, operational options, consultation with health authorities and media releases. An
important part of the framework is consultation at various stages with other agencies,
particularly health authorities that generally have responsibility to oversee the safety of
water for potable supply.
6.3.1 Vigilance Level
The Vigilance Level encompasses the possible early stages of bloom development,
when cyanobacteria are first detected in unconcentrated raw water samples (see
Chapter 12). The indicative value for the Vigilance Level is the detection of one colony,
or five filaments, of a cyanobacterium in a 1 ml water sample, although this threshold
may be adapted according to local knowledge and prior monitoring history. Taste and
odours may become detectable in the supply as the population develops above the
Vigilance Level, but their absence does not indicate absence of toxic cyanobacteria. For
example, recognition of the highly odorous earthy/muddy smelling compound geosmin,
produced by Anabaena, may occur at concentrations less than 1,000 cells per ml (Jones
and Korth, 1995). In contrast, Microcystis produces weakly odorous compounds that will
be detected only at cell concentrations 100-1,000 times higher than this, and are
therefore unlikely to be noticed in raw water.
Figure 6.3 Decision tree incorporating a model Alert Levels Framework for monitoring and
management of cyanobacteria in drinking water supplies. Note that this framework should
be adapted according to local conditions

The presence of cyanobacteria in low numbers (and sometimes detection of
characteristic tastes and odours) constitutes an early warning for potential bloom
formation; therefore, when the Vigilance Level is exceeded, it is generally appropriate to
increase the sampling frequency to at least once a week, so that potentially rapid
changes in cyanobacterial biomass can be monitored.
6.3.2 Alert Level 1
The Alert level 1 threshold (cyanobacterial biomass 2,000 cells per ml or 0.2 mm3 l-1
biovolume or 1 µg l-1 chlorophyll a) is derived from the WHO guideline for microcystin-LR
(see Chapter 5) and the highest recorded microcystin content for cyanobacterial cells
(Chapter 3). In other words, threshold is the cyanobacterial biomass level, assuming the
species is a potential producer of microcystin, where raw water microcystin
concentration could exceed the WHO guideline. Consequently, Alert Level 1 conditions
require an assessment to be made (preferably based on an analysis of total toxin
concentration in the raw water by a quantitative technique such as high pressure liquid
chromatography (HPLC) or enzyme linked immuno sorbent assay (ELISA), see Chapter
13) as to whether the concentration of potentially toxic cyanobacteria in the raw water
supply can be reduced (e.g. by offtake management) or whether the water treatment
system(s) available are effective in reducing toxin concentrations to acceptable levels
(see Figure 6.2 and Chapter 9).
Alert Level 1 conditions require consultation with health authorities for ongoing
assessment of the status of the bloom and of the suitability of treated water for human
consumption. This consultation should be initiated as early as possible and continue
after the results of toxin analysis on drinking water become available. Clearly, as the
biomass of potentially toxic cyanobacteria increases in the raw water, so does the risk of
adverse human health effects in the absence of effective water treatment systems.
Therefore, on-going monitoring for cyanobacterial biomass and toxin concentrations is
essential. The monitoring programme, which should be at least weekly in frequency,
may be extended throughout the source water body to establish the spatial variability of
the cyanobacterial population and of toxin concentration. It may also be appropriate at
this time to issue advisory notices to the public through the media or other means.
Government departments and authorities with possible interests or legal responsibilities
should also be contacted (see Table 7.1), as should organisations or facilities that treat
or care for special "at risk" members of the public (such as kidney dialysis patients, see
Chapter 4).
For toxic cyanobacteria other than those that produce microcystin (see Chapter 3, or as
indicated by bioassay results) it will be necessary for local health authorities to
undertake a detailed risk assessment based on the inherent hazard of the toxin detected
(Chapter 4), its concentration in treated drinking water, and the exposure expected. If
Alert Level 1 biomass levels are maintained, but toxins or toxicity are not detected in
cyanobacterial or raw water samples, regular monitoring should continue to ensure that
toxic strains or species do not develop over ensuing weeks or months (see Chapter 3).
6.3.3 Alert Level 2
The threshold for Alert Level 2 (cyanobacterial biomass 100,000 cells per ml or 10 mm3 l-
1 biovolume or 50 µg l-1 chlorophyll a, with the presence of toxins confirmed by chemical
or bioassay techniques) describes an established and toxic bloom with high biomass
and possibly also localised scums (although scums may also form under Alert Level 1
conditions). The sampling programme will have indicated that the bloom is widespread
with no indication of a cyanobacterial population decline in the short term. Conditions in
Alert level 2 are indicative of a significant increase in the risk of adverse human health
effects from the supply of water that is untreated, or treated by an ineffective system
(see Chapter 9), even for short-term exposure. The need for effective water treatment
systems and on-going assessment of the performance of the system thus becomes of
heightened importance. Whereas hydrophysical measures to reduce cyanobacterial
growth may still be attempted in this phase (Chapter 8), application of algicides can
enhance the problem by causing high concentrations of dissolved toxins as a
consequence of cell lysis. Whereas filtration systems (possibly combined with
flocculation-coagulation) may have removed cell-bound toxins, dissolved toxin is more
likely to break through treatment systems.
If effective activated carbon or other advanced treatment is not available, Alert Level 2
conditions should result in the activation of a contingency water supply plan which is
appropriate for the operator and the user or community. This may involve switching to an
alternative supply for human consumption, the implementation of contingent treatment
systems, or in some circumstances the delivery of safe drinking water to consumers by
tanker or in bottles. More extensive media releases, and even direct contact with
consumers via letterbox delivery of leaflets with appropriate advice to householders, may
be necessary (see Chapter 7). Where advice is provided to the public because of a
cyanobacterial hazard to human health, it will generally be advisable to emphasise that
the water would still be suitable for purposes such as washing, laundry, toilet flushing,
etc. Withdrawal of a piped drinking water supply because of a cyanobacterial toxin
hazard is usually not justifiable because the adverse health effects resulting from
disruption of supply (e.g. lack of toilet flushing, lack of fire fighting) are likely to outweigh
substantially the cyanobacterial toxin risk itself.
Monitoring of the bloom should continue in order to determine when the bloom starts to
decline so that normal supply can be resumed. The sequence at Level 2 may follow
through to deactivation of alert level conditions with media releases, and advice to
government departments and health authorities to confirm this. It is possible that the
collapse of a bloom, or a management action such as flushing, could lead to a rapid
decline from Level 2 back to Level 1 or beyond. Likewise the sequence might escalate
rapidly, bypassing Level 1 to Level 2, if adequate monitoring and early warning
information is not available. Cyanobacterial populations in natural water bodies,
especially in hot climates, may double in size in less than two days (growth rate, µ, 0.35
d-1). Therefore, monitoring frequency needs to take such potentially rapid population
growth rates into account. Figure 6.4 gives an indication of the rate of change of an
exponentially dividing population at two growth rates observed in field studies of
cyanobacteria.
Figure 6.4 Predicted development of cyanobacterial population from initial
concentration of 100 or 1,000 cells per ml and at growth rates (µ) of 0.1 and 0.3 d-1
(After Jones, 1997)
6.3.4 Overall risk assessment and summary of action-response thresholds
The information presented in Table 6.3 will enable water resource managers, treatment
plant operators and health authorities to make a rapid assessment of the potential risks
associated with increasing levels of potentially toxic cyanobacteria in water (based on
the Alert Levels Framework presented above and in Figure 6.3) and the protection
afforded by the monitoring and water treatment systems in place (based on the
protection categories given in Figure 6.2). The risk category outcomes in Table 6.3 take
into account the possibility of toxin persistence after a bloom has collapsed and the
possibility, therefore, that dissolved toxins are present in the absence of viable
cyanobacterial cells (hence the different risk outcomes for long term compared with short
term, low biomass), and the increased risk associated with treatment system failure at
very high cyanobacterial biomass (Alert Level 2).
Table 6.3 Relative risk categories for adverse human health outcomes due to toxic
cyanobacteria in drinking waters
Protection Cyanobacterial biomass category1
category2
Absent or low Absent or low Moderate - high Very high (Alert
(long term) (short term) (Alert Level 1) Level 2)
I - Low High Very high
II Minimal Low High Very high
III Minimal Low Medium- high High
IV Minimal Low Low - medium Medium
V Minimal Low Low Medium
VI Minimal Minimal Minimal - low Low
VII Minimal Minimal Minimal Minimal - low3
1 The cyanobacterial biomass categories are defined as follows (see Figures 6.3 and
6.5):
Low: Cyanobacterial biomass < 2,000 cells per ml or 0.2 mm3 l-1 biovolume or 1 µg l-1
chlorophyll a; the category is "long term" when based on data compiled over at least a
two-month period, and "short term" when based on data compiled over less than two
months (including analysis of a single sample only and taking into account the risk of
toxin persistence after a bloom collapses)
Moderate - high: Whether for a single measurement or for repeated measurements over
several weeks, cyanobacterial biomass greater than in low category but, < 100,000 cells
per ml or 10 mm3 l-1 biovolume or 50 µg l-1 chlorophyll a
Very high: Cyanobacterial biomass > 100,000 cells per ml or 10 mm3 l-1 biovolume or 50
µg l-1 chlorophyll a, and presence of toxins confirmed by chemical analysis or bioassay
2 Protection categories from Figure 6.2
3 Risk category is greater than minimal because of the increased risk associated with
treatment system breakthrough or failure at high biomass loads
Finally, Figure 6.5 provides an "at a glance" summary of the threshold managerial action
levels for drinking water (Vigilance and Alert Levels) and the health guidance levels for
recreational waters outlined in Chapter 5, Table 5.2.
6.4 Planning and response
The intensity and scope of management actions to control human health hazards
associated with cyanobacteria may vary widely. In the simplest case, a one-off study
may indicate little or no cause for concern or it may lead to an information dissemination
and public awareness and education campaign. An initial situation assessment that
indicates significant risk calls for the establishment of a monitoring programme,
formulation of contingency plans, changes in pollution control and water supply
management, and a more substantial public information and participation strategy.
Which type of response is appropriate in a given situation will depend on a number of
complex and interconnected factors, of which rational assessment of human health risk
is one part. Other important aspects include, for example, technical and institutional
capacities, economic considerations and social values. The principal management
actions that may be taken fall into three main groups:
• Water resource and catchment management. Most long-term actions are intended to
minimise nutrient inputs to water bodies, both from external (watershed) and internal
(sediment) sources, as well as altering the hydro-logic conditions in such a way as to
prevent or reduce conditions favourable for cyanobacterial bloom formation (see Chapter
8 for guidance on long-term measures). Other actions may include manipulation of the
aquatic food web to increase grazing pressure on cyanobacteria (see Chapter 8).
• Remedial measures in drinking water supply. Some of these actions may be seen to
be applicable in short time frames and may therefore be deployed in response to a
specific situation; other are also medium- or long-term actions, such as installing
safeguards (such as treatment steps) in drinking water supply that will assist in
controlling risks while such safeguards remain installed and operated. Other actions are
associated with contingency plans to be activated in case of need (see Chapter 9).
• Public information and awareness-raising. A well-informed public (see Chapter 10),
aware of the potential and real risks of toxic cyanobacteria, is important for many
reasons. These reasons include an improved surveillance capacity through public
participation; for example swimmers and other users can contact local authorities if they
see cyanobacterial scums, and householders can report unusual odours in their drinking
water supply. Several Australian States have community-based "WaterWatch" or
"Stream-Watch" monitoring programmes that are undertaken by high school students
and community groups. Experience has shown that more aware communities, which are
adequately informed by appropriate authorities, will be less likely to react inappropriately
in the event of a bloom.
Figure 6.5 Summary of managerial action levels for drinking waters (see Alert
Levels Framework decision tree in Figure 6.3) and for bathing waters (see
Guidance Levels in Table 5.2). Note that for bathing waters, the special Guidance
Level 3 (scum formation) can be achieved during calm weather conditions at open
water biomass levels similar to Guidance Level 1
Few remedial measures specific to recreational water sites are available in addition to
those for minimising bloom formation, increasing public awareness, and informing the
public. In some instances, fencing-off or the placing of a boom to prevent accumulation
of scums may be considered for densely used and highly impacted areas, in addition to
public information and awareness-raising.
Proactive management, that is taking action before significant cyanobacterial
proliferation has occurred, is generally preferable to reactive (or crisis) management,
that is placing controls in place once significant cyanobacterial proliferation has begun.
Few countries presently operate monitoring programmes capable of identifying
potentially hazardous conditions and early warning systems have not as yet been
developed (for example giving several weeks notice of impending toxic cyanobacterial
hazards), even though previous monitoring data may indicate annual "high risk" months
or periods. In practice, therefore, management of cyanobacterial hazards typically
occurs in three ways, preventative management plans, contingency plans and planning
in emergency situations.
6.4.1 Preventative management plans
Management to prevent human health effects will typically involve prevention and
minimisation of cyanobacterial blooms, deployment of appropriate drinking water
treatment where required, and controls on recreational water use in order that human
populations are not exposed to significant risks. It will also involve general contingency
planning, which is considered in section 6.4.2.
History has shown that single-action management plans tend to have poor success rates;
one example of this was the ban during the 1970s in several European countries on the
use of detergents containing phosphate. Where only this action was applied, little
success was seen in the abatement of cyanobacterial and algal blooms because other
sources of phosphorus pollution were largely ignored (including the remaining 50-70 per
cent of phosphorus in sewage that does not arise from detergents).
Reduction of nutrient pollution below threshold values which control cyanobacterial
bloom formation is highly effective and sustainable. However, many water bodies require
large reductions in nutrient loads, and the implementation of the necessary measures is
likely to take a number of years. Furthermore, the high nutrient concentrations within
such water bodies may decline only slowly in response to reduced external loading,
particularly if water exchange rates are low or release from sediments is high. Thus, total
prevention of cyanobacterial bloom development may require extended recovery time
spans, and may even be unachievable in naturally eutrophic systems. In such situations,
bloom minimisation will generally be accompanied by contingency planning and, if
blooms are expected to occur, by application of appropriate drinking water treatment
either continuously or at times of cyanobacterial occurrence in the source water.
Preventative management may effectively address the hydrophysical conditions of
cyanobacterial growth through the use of hydraulic management (flushing, artificial
mixing), or reduce drinking water intake concentrations by offtake management.
An effective approach to preventative management may be changing the drinking water
source (where this is feasible). This approach was illustrated by the change from using
water in shallow eutrophic ponds and ditches to using groundwater in China (see Box
5.3).
There is no single formula that can be followed to compile a good preventative
management plan. However, key elements may include:
• The convening of a multi-agency and multidisciplinary committee to develop the plan
and to co-ordinate its implementation.
• Development of comprehensive policy relating to point and diffuse source pollution
control, and for the regulation of river flows and reservoir management for the prevention
of cyanobacterial problems.
• Compilation or review of relevant technical information (such as for bloom prevention
and management, drinking water treatment and recreational water management), and
the involvement of key technical (e.g. scientific and engineering) personnel to provide
expert advice.
• Development of procedures (including financial and institutional procedures) for
implementing key actions arising from the plan.
• Development of monitoring systems to determine the effectiveness of management
actions.
• Establishment of response mechanisms for modification of action in the light of
feedback on management plans.
• Development of means for effective communication between agencies and with the
public and media.
Two examples of how preventative plans may be co-ordinated are provided in Boxes 7.2
and 7.4.
6.4.2 Contingency plans
Plans and actions for prevention of health hazards arising from cyanobacterial blooms
should aim to prevent and curtail blooms and ensure that plans are in place to respond
to blooms when they do occur. Planning for such events is an important part of the
overall strategy for managing health hazards associated with toxic cyanobacterial
blooms.
Contingency plans are normally developed and managed at a local or regional level.
National and regional authorities may, nevertheless, have important roles to play in
supporting and facilitating plan formulation and in providing expertise, should an event
occur. Key elements of a contingency plan overlap with those for preventative
management and include:
• The convening of a multi-agency and multidisciplinary committee to develop, maintain
and, if necessary, modify the plan and co-ordinate its implementation if required. The
members of such a committee should be aware of their authority and responsibility as
committee members in advance of an occurrence (see Chapter 7).
• Development of a comprehensive response plan including specific actions at different
alert levels and the responsibilities of different agencies.
• Compilation of a manual or guide for incident response addressing the major areas of
activity and including management, drinking water treatment and recreational water
management, and communication with the public and media.
• Plans for effective communication between key government agencies, health
authorities, water supply agencies, hospitals and the public need periodic testing.
• Ensuring the availability of technical capacity (especially analytical capacity and access
to expertise) to deal with the demands of the contingency plan. The specified experts or
institutions should be able to respond to specific questions in time horizons relevant to
incident response, such as:
• What is the size, extent and toxicity of the bloom?
• If toxic, what types and concentrations of cyanotoxins are present in the drinking water
supply and how are they partitioned between cell-bound and dissolved phases?
• Is an adequate water treatment system in place (see Chapter 9 and Table 6.2 for
details), and if not will the general public be exposed to "unsafe" concentrations of
cyanotoxins?
• Special precautions (e.g. portable water treatment systems, or transported safe water
supplies) may be advisable for "at risk" groups especially susceptible to cyanotoxins,
such as patients with previous acute liver damage.
• Special precautions (usually additional treatment facilities with careful monitoring of
performance) are of crucial importance for hospitals treating patients with kidney dialysis
or intravenous therapy.
• Identification of potential alternative water supplies, preferably from uncontaminated
groundwater (there is the possibility that other local surface water storage facilities may
be suffering simultaneously from cyanobacterial problems) to be exploited in the case of
severe health hazards. This may include plans for transporting clean, treated water from
other areas or deploying portable water treatment systems.
• Establishment of awareness amongst local health practitioners where significant
hazards are believed to exist and development of systems for communicating with them
in the event of an outbreak, including for example advice regarding the possible
symptoms of cyanobacterial intoxication and what treatments are advised.
• Prior agreements regarding standardised press releases and the conditions under
which their release would be justified. Release of information to the media should be co-
ordinated through the main organising committee or task force.
6.4.3 Emergency responses and incident investigation
The actions to be taken in responding to an incident are similar to the elements listed
under "contingency planning" (above). However, time constraints will be greater and,
because of lack of prior preparation, resources may be less available. The risk of
contradictory "messages" from concerned authorities is proportionately greater.
Experience has shown that initiating interagency co-operation, especially between the
drinking water supplier and the health authority, securing an expert opinion on the real
risk to human health and initiating communication with the media and public, are crucial
elements in the earliest stages of responding to an incident. It should be recalled that
whilst true emergencies can arise from cyanobacterial blooms, as was the case with the
Caruaru dialysis tragedy in Brazil (see Box 4.4), an event may be perceived as an
emergency or "environmental crisis" by the public and the media even if this is not the
case from a health viewpoint.
If the incident is deemed to be severe (as was the case in the Palm Island Mystery
Disease, see Box 4.3), a health investigation should be instigated without delay. A
follow-up investigation of an incident will often provide valuable information for both
preventative and contingency planning. It may also lead to substantial improvement of
the regional assessment of hazard due to cyanotoxin exposure, as in the case of one
such investigation from Canada (Box 6.1).
Box 6.1 The Manitoba incident
Deacon Reservoir is the City of Winnipeg's main storage facility for water from Shoal Lake. The
lake is generally considered to be of high quality and its water is only disinfected with chlorine
prior to distribution for drinking. In late August 1993, a large cyanobacterial bloom developed in
Deacon Reservoir. In an attempt to control both cyanobacterial density and taste and odour
problems, municipal officials isolated the reservoir and treated it with copper sulphate. This action
raised concerns that if the bloom contained toxin-producing cyanobacteria, significant quantities
of the toxins may have been released into the reservoir.
Sampling determined that toxin-producing cyanobacteria were not present in the Deacon
Reservoir, but they were present in Shoal lake, the dominant species being Microcystis
aeruginosa. Analysis of water samples indicated that microcystin-LR produced by M. aeruginosa
was present in samples collected from Shoal Lake and from the distribution system, but it was not
present at detectable levels (< 0.05 µg l-1) in samples from Deacon Reservoir. Maximum
microcystin-LR concentrations measured in the raw water of Shoal Lake and in treated tap water
were 0.45 µg l-1 and 0.55 µg l-1, respectively. Subsequent monitoring showed a steep decline in
concentrations, suggesting that higher microcystin-LR levels may have been present earlier in
August 1993.
As the weather during the summer of 1993 was characterised by below-normal temperatures and
above-normal precipitation (conditions that are usually not supportive of cyanobacterial bloom
formation) there was concern that higher levels of microcystin-LR could develop in Shoal Lake
during the more usual relatively hot, dry summers. As a result, Manitoba Environment, in co-
operation with the City of Winnipeg, continued to monitor for microcystin-LR in Winnipeg's water
supply. On six occasions between 1994 and the end of 1996, microcystin-LR was detected at
concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 0.5 µg l-1.
Because Shoal Lake (a relatively nutrient-poor water body) had supported a toxic cyanobacterial
bloom, Manitoba Environment became concerned that toxic blooms might also occur in rural
surface water supplies in southern Manitoba, which are generally more nutrient-rich. A
comprehensive two-year study was conducted on water quality in rural south-western Manitoba
surface water supplies in 1995 and 1996. In the first year of the study, microcystin-LR was found
to be widely distributed in all water supply categories. Rural municipal water supplies had a
higher detection frequency (93 per cent) than on-farm domestic/livestock dugouts (57 per cent),
suggesting that conventional treatment methods were only partially successful in removing the
toxin. Mean concentrations ranged from 0.23 µg l-1 in recreational sites to 0.35 µg l-1 in dugouts
used exclusively for livestock. In the second year of the study, seven rural surface water supplies
were intensively sampled for microcystin-LR. The hepatotoxin was found throughout the entire
sampling period (June to December 1996), sometimes at levels greater than 0.5 µg l-1, which was
the "Emergency Health Advisory Guideline" formulated by Health Canada in response to the
1993 incident.
6.5 References
Bowling, L.C. and Baker, P.D. 1996 Major cyanobacterial bloom in the Barwon-Darling
River, Australia in 1991, and underlying limnological conditions. Aust. J. Mar. Freshwat.
Res., 47, 643-657.
Chudek, E., Horn, A., Joo, M., McLaren, S. 1998 Stratification Patterns in Queensland
Dams. Report by Water Monitoring Group, Queensland Department of Natural
Resources, Australia, 76 pp.
Earthwatch 1992 Chemical Pollution: a Global Overview. United Nations Environment
Programme, Nairobi.
Gerrard, S. 1995 Environmental risk management. In: T. O'Riordan [Ed.] Environmental
Science for Environmental Management. Longman Scientific and Technical, Harlow,
296-316.
Jones, G.J. 1997 Limnological study of cyanobacterial dominance in three South-East
Queensland reservoirs. In: R.R.D. Davis [Ed.] Managing Algal Blooms: Outcomes from
the CSIRO Blue-Green Algal Research Program. CSIRO Land and Water, Canberra, 51-
66.
Jones, G.J. and Korth, W. 1995 In situ production of volatile odour compounds by river
and reservoir phytoplankton populations in Australia. Wat. Sci. Tech., 31, 145-151.
NRA 1990 Toxic Blue-Green Algae. Water Quality Series No. 2. The National Rivers
Authority, London, 125 pp.
Reynolds, C.S. 1984 The Ecology of Freshwater Phytoplankton. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Skulberg, O.M., Codd, G.A. and Carmichael, W.W. 1984 Toxic blue-green algal blooms
in Europe: a growing problem. Ambio, 13, 244 - 247.
Soby, B.A., Simpson, A.C.D. and Ives, D.P. 1993 Integrating Public and Scientific
Judgements into a Toolkit for Managing Food-Related Risks, Stage I. Literature Review
and Feasibility Study. University of East Anglia, Norwich.
Vollenweider, R.A. 1968 Scientific Fundamentals of the Eutrophication of Lakes and
Flowing Waters with Particular Reference to Nitrogen and Phosphorus as Factors in
Eutrophication. Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.
Vollenweider, R.A. and Kerekes, J. 1980 The loading concept as basis for controlling
eutrophication philosophy and preliminary results of the OECD programme on
eutrophication. Prog. Wat. Technol., 12, 5-38.
WHO 1993 Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality. Second edition. Volume 1
Recommendations. World Health Organization, Geneva.
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health consequences,
monitoring and management
Edited by Ingrid Chorus and Jamie Bartram
© 1999 WHO
ISBN 0-419-23930-8
Chapter 7. IMPLEMENTATION OF MANAGEMENT
PLANS
* This chapter was prepared by Jamie Bartram, Jessica C. Vapnek, Gary Jones, Lee
Bowling, Ian Falconer and Geoffrey A. Codd
Control of hazards to human health from cyanobacteria is part of a wider picture of water
quality and quantity management, environmental protection, policy formulation and
general development concerns. Implementation of programmes to address
cyanobacteria-related health hazards therefore takes place within the larger framework
of other local, national, and international plans and activities relating to water. That
framework is the subject of this chapter, which examines the principal elements required
to respond effectively to cyanobacteria-related health risks. First the organisations,
agencies and groups that may become involved where there is a cyanobacterial bloom
are identified, then the tools governments can use to implement policy are examined,
together with legislation as an implementation tool. The remainder of the chapter
outlines how professionals and the public may be educated, informed and mobilised.
7.1 Organisations, agencies and groups
7.1.1 Vested interests
Every water body has associated with it a set of persons and organisations with a vested
interest and an involvement. Vested interests can be associated with the level of water
(flooding, hydroelectricity, transportation, recreation); with the contents of the water
(fishing, recreation); with the quality of the water (drinking water/domestic use,
recreation); with the quantity of water (irrigation, industry, transportation); with its motility
(wastewater, transport); with the preservation of the water body itself (ecosystem
maintenance, wildlife conservation); or with some combination of these.
Few rivers, lakes, estuaries and seas can support all vested interests equally and so
compromises amongst conflicting activities are inevitable. Diverting too much water for
irrigation lowers water levels for transportation and may increase the salinity and mineral
content of the water, reducing the numbers offish and causing stagnation. It may also
increase the likelihood of algal and cyanobacterial bloom formation in river reaches
downstream of irrigation reaches, because many cyanobacteria species prefer slow-
flowing river conditions for bloom development. Allowing unrestricted transportation of
dangerous cargoes may damage the ecosystem and wildlife of the surrounding area.
Limiting the construction of dams to preserve a riverine environment may mean
insufficient energy production and water inputs for industry, domestic needs and mining.
Activities particularly likely to increase cyanobacterial hazards in water resources include:
• Land-use, land-use changes and abstraction practices, which may have an impact
through diffuse and point sources of nutrients (such as agriculture) and through
changing run-off regimes (e.g. caused by urbanisation and forest cutting).
• Pollutant discharges and especially nutrient-rich municipal wastewaters and sewage
discharges, which are likely to increase eutrophication.
• Flow control and river flow reduction through, for example, damming, which may
increase opportunities for cyanobacterial proliferation by increasing hydraulic retention
times and the propensity for water column stratification.
• Abstraction, whether constant (such as for drinking water supply), seasonal (such as
for irrigation) or intermediate (such as for power generation), which may tend to
decrease flow rates and also increase opportunities for cyanobacterial proliferation by
increasing retention times.
As with any other activity in relation to water resources, taking action in response to a
cyanobacteria risk requires the recognition and balancing of vested interests. For
example, increasing stream flows to decrease hydraulic residence time will have
beneficial effects on drinking water and animal health, but may have detrimental effects
on recreational use and agricultural (irrigation) interests.
Responding to an environmentally-related health issue, such as a toxic cyanobacterial
blooms, implicates and involves many with vested interests who can be defined broadly
as representing the public, the media, the government (or its agents) and the private or
corporate sector. The largest and most vociferous vested interest group will often be the
general public, who may demand that the quality of their drinking or recreational water
be returned to a level that they deem acceptable, as soon as possible. Sometimes the
water quality standard that the public expects may seem unrealistic (e.g. "The water
used to be crystal clear when I was a child, so why isn't it now?"). Farmers may also
represent a vociferous lobby who may insist that the water necessary for farms and
livestock be again made safe so that productive activity may resume. However, they
may also be a strong lobby against reduction of diffuse pollution input by arguing that
changes in agricultural practices, e.g. fertiliser application, would inevitably reduce crop
yields. Water suppliers often have a strong vested interest in a better resource quality
because that increases the safety of their product and reduces treatment costs, but
agencies may tend to avoid publicity on this issue in order to avoid a negative image and
adverse public comment. Thus, the greatest driving force for action will nearly always
come from the user sector.
The media can play a key role in acting as vehicles for public awareness, thereby
triggering public outcry. They can also be vital for advising the public of potential health
risks (or their absence), for informing the public whether appropriate actions have been
taken and of the efficacy of these actions.
Notwithstanding governments' primary public safety role, where they exist, private
companies involved in water supply and wastewater treatment processes will also have
a key role in any response. Collaboration with such companies will be necessary
whether planning is of an emergency or long-term strategic nature. However, private
companies may view the monitoring data they generate as proprietary or commercial
and their active participation needs to be encouraged, whereas governments may view
information they hold as being in the public domain.
Other important sectors with a vested interest in many countries are tourism and
recreation. Hotels, holiday resorts, water skiing and fishing-based tourism operations, for
example, can be affected profoundly by adverse publicity and recreational restrictions
brought about by toxic cyanobacterial blooms. Involvement of these sectors will be
extremely important if local acceptance of management plans (short- and long-term) is to
be obtained. The fact that private companies operate on a profit motive does not
necessarily place them at odds with governments' public safety goals, because safe
water is also a prerequisite for most, if not all, kinds of tourism and recreation activities,
and is seen increasingly as a priority amongst tourists and other recreational water users.
Where a cyanobacterial bloom occurs, private companies, governments, the media, the
public and others with a vested interest will express and seek support for their particular
interests, some of which may conflict with one another. As a result, multi-sectoral co-
operation is essential.
7.1.2 Multi-sectoral involvement, agencies and their roles
Governments have ultimate responsibility for safeguarding public health and their role
will be to minimise the damage and to assess the circumstances that led to the
cyanobacterial problem (s) in the first place. They can also assist with public awareness
activities, as outlined in section 7.4. Although governments usually take the leading role
in co-ordinating policy amongst vested interests, they may later turn over leadership to a
multi-sectoral committee or group to continue developing longer-term plans or strategies
(see Box 7.1).
Human health issues affect many different aspects of environmental policy and
management and therefore programme co-ordination is both desirable and necessary
for effective action in environment and health. Yet in many countries, environmental
health programmes are assigned to different specialised agencies, making co-ordination
difficult to achieve. Chapter 18 of Agenda 21, the plan of action arising from the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development outlines the problem as follows:
"The fragmentation of responsibilities for water resources development among sectoral
agencies is proving, however, to be an even greater impediment [to effective action]...
than has been anticipated. Effective implementation and co-ordination mechanisms are
required" (Anon, 1992).
Box 7.1 Development of the New South Wales Blue-Green Algal Task Force and New South
Wales Algal Coordinating Committee
In 1991, an extensive toxic cyanobacterial bloom along the Barwon/Darling River system in
Australia triggered the implementation of policy for reactive and planned management. The
Barwon arises in the Great Dividing Range of Eastern Australia and flows southwest for 2,735 km
until it joins the Murray River. The Barwon/Darling River runs through an arid and seasonally very
hot environment where temperatures of 40-45 °C occur during the summer; flow is regulated for
irrigation and the supply of drinking water.
Flow in the Barwon/Darling River is controlled by the release of water from large reservoirs in the
mountain catchment area, by numerous weirs along the length of the river, and by an extensive
off-river storage towards the downstream end of the system. The release is determined largely by
irrigation requirements. The river is subject to floods at irregular intervals, usually through
subtropical storms. Rainfall in the catchment was low during 1991, leading to a high demand for
water for irrigation and very low river flows. In late spring (October/November 1991), a massive
bloom of Anabaena circinalis occurred in over 1,000 km of the river. As an example, 245,000
cells per ml were recorded in the weir pool from which drinking water is supplied to the town of
Bourke, New South Wales (NSW). The drinking water in this town was, at the time, chlorinated
river water with no additional treatment. Such supplies are common world-wide. Widespread
scums occurred along the riverbanks where livestock drank.
The bloom came to public attention when the local newspaper printed a picture of several dead
cows in a weir pool, with comments on the water quality. Water samples were collected and sent
to the laboratory for toxicity testing. Intraperitoneal injection of lysed extracts of the Anabaena
cells showed considerable neurotoxicity, with evidence of some neurotoxicity in drinking water
samples. The toxins concerned have subsequently been identified as saxitoxin-type neurotoxins.
The NSW State Government declared a State of Emergency, which enabled rapid action
including the deployment by the Army of portable water treatment plants capable of using highly
contaminated water to produce a safe supply. These units provided dissolved air flotation with
flocculation for cyanobacterial cell removal, followed by filtration and granular activated carbon
adsorption of any toxic organic materials. The water supplied to the affected towns from these
plants had no detectable toxin content. A major public information campaign was rapidly put in
place with local meetings, radio and press coverage. Health officers recommended that
swimming and water sports were discontinued, with variable success. Farms drawing their own
water supply directly from the river were particularly at risk. Livestock deaths along the river were
difficult to quantify, but about 2,000 sheep and cattle deaths were reported. The State of
Emergency ended when heavy rain in the catchment flushed the river and increased turbidity
greatly. No further blooms occurred in the river that summer.
As a consequence of the Barwon/Darling River bloom the State Government established the
NSW Blue-Green Algal Task Force (BGATF). The task force was chaired by the State Water
Resources Department and made up of representatives from key state government departments
(environment protection authority, departments of agriculture, conservation and land
management, health and public works, state emergency services board and state "total
catchment management committee" (itself a co-ordinated multi-sector public group)), local water
boards and corporations, research scientists and the Murray Darling Basin Commission, a multi-
state water management agency. Later, when the state of Emergency passed, the BGATF
became the NSW State Algal Coordinating Committee (SACC). Members were added to the
committee from the adjoining states of Queensland, Victoria and South Australia (these states
had, in the interim, set up their own algal task forces). Their membership "helped speed
information transfer, and reflected the principle that management measures must be implemented
as part of an integrated resource management approach which cuts across established agency
and geographical boundaries" (NSWBGATF, 1993).
During the emergency phase of the bloom, the BGATF co-ordinated cyano-bacterial monitoring
throughout the river, the provision of alternative water supplies, the drilling of new boreholes (for
groundwater), the installation of water boom curtains to minimise cyanobacterial access to pump
inlet valves, the installation of emergency water treatment systems that could remove (or were
believed to remove) cyanobacterial toxins from contaminated drinking water supplies and, most
importantly, the transfer of information on a regular basis to the media. After the emergency
phase, the BGATF went on to develop the State's comprehensive integrated "Algal Management
Strategy" which aimed to minimise the future occurrence and impact of algal (mostly
cyanobacterial) blooms. The strategy included contingency planning, improving water system
management, reducing nutrient levels in waterways, education and awareness raising (including
media interactions) and research. Specific activities of SACC under the Algal Management
Strategy were: development of a nutrient control strategy (which included establishment of
nutrient management plans with actions such as plans for the upgrade of sewage treatment and
disposal systems); reduction in the phosphorus content of washing powders and detergents;
upgrades to septic tank systems in "high risk" catchments; reduction of soil erosion; fertiliser and
stormwater control strategies; and a public and local government "Phosphorus Awareness and
Reduction Campaign". The Committee also subsequently co-ordinated or implemented water
allocation and water system management plans, some of which were governed by multi-state
agreements (Box 7.3).
To improve the transfer of information to and from the State's many regions (some of which are
over 1,000 km from its headquarters in Sydney), regional algal co-ordinating committees
(RACCs) were also established. The RACCs were charged with the responsibility for developing
local contingency and management plans (based largely on guidelines put forward by SACC), co-
ordinating local media and public education, co-ordinating local monitoring and training in
cyanobacterial and algal sampling and identification, and identifying when cyanobacterial alerts
should be issued for regional waterways.
Table 7.1 outlines some of the functions necessary for cyanobacterial bloom
management and indicates the different government departments or other organisations
that may have responsibility for each function.
In addition to single-issue government or quasi-governmental agencies in a particular
country, there may be national or regional co-ordinating groups which have as their
mandate to bring together, or to attempt to bring together, the various sectors, user
groups and agencies involved in water management. There may also be water users
associations or co-operative societies with interests in water. Any one or several of these
agencies and co-ordinating groups may be involved when a cyanobacteria problem
arises.
The co-ordination necessary for effective action on environment and health issues is
difficult to achieve, not only because it takes place amongst those with vested interests,
agencies and groups representing (at times) divergent agendas, but also because the
co-ordination itself is complex. That is, it does not simply consist of linking different
institutions towards a common goal. It also requires combining inputs from different
areas of expertise (inter-disciplinarity); facilitating collaboration between policy-orientated
institutions and regulatory institutions; and fostering co-operation among sectors that
positively and negatively influence environmental health quality, including industry,
agriculture, local government and transport. Experience in the UK and Australia has
shown that an effective strategy to achieve this complex co-ordination is the formation of
interdepartmental task forces, with representatives from all relevant government
agencies and other key groups with a vested interest (Box 7.1). Such task forces have
been crucial to the success of emergency and long-term management of toxic
cyanobacterial blooms.
7.2 Policy tools
A number of tools may be deployed by governments in the pursuit of water management
and health protection policy. Although sometimes discussed in isolation, these tools are
generally inter-related, and policy implementation is most effective when a range of tools
is employed (see Box 7.2).
The principal interventions and tools relevant to the control of cyanobacterial hazards
include:
• Consensus through conflict resolution. Conflict resolution involves negotiation, through
formal and informal processes, guided or unguided by an expert, which may be binding
or non-binding, depending on the agreement of the parties before entering into the
negotiation. Each party's interests are aired, then jointly evaluated, ranked and then
balanced. Ideally, this process precludes, or at least places in abeyance, any
subsequent conflict, because it is through consensus that a plan of action (balancing all
relevant interests) is developed and agreed upon.
• Guidelines and recommendations. An enhanced role for experts informs the
development of guidelines and recommendations. Such guidelines and
recommendations suggest methods of complying with desired policies. They are
generally not binding, but rather serve an educational and advisory purpose, in that
those studying them learn what actions to take. To be effective (because adherence is
voluntary), each guideline or recommendation should be explained and justified.
• Non-binding agreements, including industry codes. Non-binding agreements, such as
industry codes, are similar to guidelines and recommendations, except that they may be
more formal. Although not binding, such codes have a high success rate, especially
where industry members are involved in their formulation. Such involvement is desirable
because industry members know their capacities and, furthermore, once they have
signed up to a code there is "peer pressure" by other members to adhere to it. In
addition, there might have been reluctance to follow codes developed by third parties,
such as environmental and advocacy groups. Such concerns are assuaged where the
codes have been developed following wide consultation. As with consensus building
through negotiation, non-binding agreements involve all parties in creating acceptable
compromises, thus ensuring greater success.
• Economic measures. A set of measures, both supportive and penalising, can be
implemented to encourage the reduction of water pollution. Generally, such economic
incentives and disincentives are contained in legislation, although they may also appear
in non-binding agreements such as industry codes. Supportive measures can be direct
subsidies for water protection technologies or practices (such as setting aside
agricultural areas), or various forms of tax reductions (such as for introduction of
treatment steps). Penalties involve fees for discharge, which can be calculated
according to the load of individual hazardous substances, with each substance tagged
with a sum per unit of loading.
• National legislation. Because of its formality and inflexibility, law may not necessarily
be the best avenue for implementing policy. Nevertheless, it should be recalled that in
situations where there are competing interests, legislation offers certain benefits. It
provides stability in a complex and changing environment and those with vested
interests know where to go to seek the rules that apply to them. In addition, at least at
the national level, legislation provides a coercive effect (the force of the State) upon
those that have neglected to take action despite having agreed to do so (this has been
known to occur particularly where there are financial interests at stake).
Table 7.1 Involvement of government agencies and other organisations in short-term
(including emergency) and long-term management of cyanobacteria-related health
hazards
Function Agency
Water pollution control, water resources Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Water Resources,
monitoring, enforcing water quality Environmental Protection Agency
standards
Protection of habitats and fisheries Ministry of Environment, Environmental Protection
Agency, Ministry of Wildlife, Ministry of Fisheries
Independent surveillance of drinking water Ministry of Health, Ministry of Public Health, local
supplies and recreational water quality, government
enforcement of corresponding standards
Drinking water supply Local government, private companies
Provision of recreational facilities, Ministry of Tourism, local and state government,
promotion of recreational water use private companies
Allocation of water rights Government agencies, parastatals, water users'
associations, courts adjudicating disputes
Water storage and river management, Ministry of Water Resources, Ministry of Environment,
monitoring, water allocation policy Ministry of Water, Ministry of Public Works,
Environmental Protection Agency
Catchment (watershed) management, Ministry of Natural Resources, Ministry of Agriculture
agricultural policy
Upgrades to public infrastructure, e.g. Ministry of Public Works, private and semiprivate
drinking water and sewage treatment sector utilities and service organisations
plants
Shipment of emergency water supplies Local government, private companies
Public education, research into causes Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health, local
and control of toxic blooms government, universities and research institutions,
recreational or other users' groups
Implementation of emergency response Local defence organisations, local government,
plans emergency preparedness agencies, Environmental
Protection Agency, health ministries/departments
Box 7.2 A combination of tools successfully reduced pollutant loads in Germany
To reduce hazardous substances and nutrients in wastewater, the federal government of the
former Federal Republic of Germany ("West Germany") introduced pollution fees per unit loading
in the 1970s. The combination of continuously rising fees with options of exemption from their
payment if new investments were made in wastewater treatment, resulted in great improvements
in treatment technology and water quality. At the time, many critics expected the fees to have little
effect because the fine per unit of loading appeared to be substantially lower than the costs for
improving treatment. However, the imposition of fees was only one of several tools used by the
government and society to achieve the goal of reducing loads. At the same time a strong "green
movement" produced public pressure against industrial pollution, industry developed new
production procedures which either avoided producing wastewater or included treatment, an
international treaty in 1987 targeted the reduction of pollution loads to the North Sea by 50 per
cent, and new legislation was discussed and implemented (such as European Union and national
legislation to introduce nutrient stripping in all treatment plants handling more than 10,000
population equivalents). In conjunction, these measures caused a very clear downward trend for
many pollutants, largely because industrial effluents have become substantially "cleaner", and
many sewage treatment facilities have introduced steps for nutrient removal. The major source of
nutrient loading into surface waters now is agriculture, and measures to reduce this source of
input require implementation.
All legislation must be underpinned with a firm policy background so as to ensure that it
will be effective once enacted. As one expert explains:
"Simply to promulgate laws and designate responsible officers will not suffice. It is first
necessary to build an effective political base of opinion and power and then to design
adequate systems, assign authority, provide resources and translate plans into action;
finally the development of the systems must be monitored, so that they can be adapted
as required. In most countries sectoral bureaucracies have to be brought under a
considerable degree of control and given clear, consistent and persistent policy direction,
if co-ordination schemes are not to flounder." (Schaefer, 1981, pp 42-43)
In most countries, before new legislation is introduced by a sector ministry, policy
approval must be sought and obtained from the Cabinet or Council of Ministers. This
ensures that the process of formulation of legislation is not an academic exercise,
undertaken with no thought for the realistic chances for enactment and implementation.
The existence of laws which are either unachievable or unenforceable means that
financial or human resources have been diverted from other, perhaps more important
(e.g. health), priorities. Moreover, the existence of such legislation reflects negatively on
the entire legal system.
• International and interstate plans and agreements. As noted in section 7.1.1, actions
taken to further one interest may have effects on other vested interests. Where a body of
water crosses international or state lines, such actions have international and, at times,
diplomatic implications. Few rivers and lakes remain within national or state boundaries,
adding a diplomatic or more complex legislative dimension to many water resources
management issues. There is a clear trend towards development of international plans
and agreements which organise water management around particular water bodies. Box
7.3 gives one example of an inter-state response to cyanobacterial bloom management
in Australia.
Box 7.3 The Murray-Darling Basin Algal Management Strategy
The Murray-Darling Basin (MDB) is the largest riverine catchment in Australia, crossing four
states, Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia, and the Australian Capital
Territory. The MDB covers an area similar in size to Western Europe. The Murray-Darling River
system is actually a network of more than a dozen major rivers that ultimately join with the Murray
River and discharge to the sea at Lake Alexandrina in South Australia (the site of the world's first
scientifically documented toxic cyanobacterial bloom in 1878, see Chapter 3). The catchment is
the agricultural "bread basket" of Australia, with a heavy reliance on water abstraction from the
major rivers and headwater storages for irrigation.
Australia is a Commonwealth of states and legislative responsibility for the control and
management of water resources (indeed, all natural resources) is vested in the individual states.
In 1990, it was recognised that the four states covering the MDB needed to co-ordinate their
actions in controlling cyanobacterial blooms because actions, or lack of action, by one state could
have a deleterious effect on downstream states. Thus the MDB Commission (a non-government,
multi-state organisation that manages the water resources of the MDB) set up an Algal
Management Working Group. The working group was made up of members from the four states,
the commonwealth government and CSIRO (the national scientific research organisation). Its
charter was to "reduce the frequency and intensity of algal (actually cyanobacterial) blooms and
other water quality problems associated with nutrient pollution in the MDB through a framework of
coordinated planning and management actions". Later the cyanobacterial management strategy
was also to focus on the impact of the altered river flow regime on the occurrence of
cyanobacterial blooms, as well as on problems associated directly with nutrient inputs.
The first project commissioned by the working group was the production of a major report
identifying and quantifying (by modelling estimates only) all sources of nitrogen and phosphorus
inputs in the MDB. Soon after that report was released in 1992, the MDB Commission convened
14 Technical Advisory Groups (TAGs) to provide expert advice on issues ranging from nutrient
input control to cyanobacterial physiology and toxicology to water treatment. The 14 TAG reports
were released in one major report (MDBC, 1993). Following the release of the TAG Report, the
working group released a draft algal management strategy that was circulated widely among
government departments, community organisations and interested members of the public. Public
meetings and workshops were held to discuss key issues. The importance of gaining broad
community support and "ownership" of the draft report were seen to be crucial to the success of
the project. Comments obtained during this consultation phase were summarised and
incorporated in the final report (Murray Darling Basin Ministerial Council, 1994).
Unlike the state task forces that were set up during a "crisis" period (see Box 7.1), there was little
focus on short-term or emergency management. Rather, the MDB algal management strategy
focused on longer-term, strategic initiatives to reduce the frequency and severity of
cyanobacterial blooms. Its key elements were nutrient reduction, river flow management,
education and awareness, research and monitoring, and funding. The published strategy also
contains algal management case studies (on nutrient and flow management), techniques for
determining nutrient targets for individual catchments (including the use of catchment-nutrient
export models), and modelling studies on the impact of river regulation on natural flows in the
MDB.
In addition to plans and strategies, many water bodies are governed by bi- or multilateral
agreements which embody the customary rules and policy priorities of all the countries
with an interest in the river, lake or sea. Such agreements may address issues such as
reducing pollution, exchanging information on the level and volume of water, carrying out
flood management, early warning systems, monitoring changes in the path of
watercourses, sharing costs and managing dispute resolution mechanisms (Nanni,
1996). Few of these are of direct relevance to the control of cyanobacterial hazards
beyond policies relevant to the control of eutrophication in general. Nevertheless, some
international agreements specifically include provisions for notification of downstream
countries of pollution events in order to enable them to take corrective action (Box 7.4).
Including bloom formation as an issue requiring notification of downstream countries
might assist in control of cyanobacterial hazards.
Box 7.4 The UN ECE Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Waters and
International Lakes
The Convention was drawn up under the auspices of the United Nations Economic Commission
for Europe (UN ECE) and adopted at Helsinki on 17 March 1992 (UN ECE, 1992). It entered into
force on 6 October 1996. The convention is intended to strengthen local, national and regional
measures to protect and use transboundary surface waters and groundwaters in an ecologically
sound way. The parties will prevent, control and reduce the pollution of transboundary waters by
hazardous substances, nutrients, bacteria and viruses. The precautionary principle and the
polluter-pays principle have been recognised as guiding principles in the implementation of such
measures, together with the requirement that water management should meet the needs of the
present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs. This will protect and conserve not only water resources but also soil, flora, fauna, air,
climate, landscape and cultural heritage.
In order to comply with the Convention, emission limits for discharges from point sources shall be
based on the best available technology. The Parties will also issue authorisations for wastewater
discharges and monitor compliance therewith, adopt water quality objectives, apply at least
biological or equivalent processes to treat municipal wastewater, and develop and implement
best environmental practices to reduce the input of nutrients and hazardous substances from
agriculture and other diffuse sources. Parties bordering the same transboundary waters will
conclude specific bilateral or multilateral agreements which will provide for the establishment of
joint bodies (e.g. river or lake commissions). They will consult each other on any measures to be
carried out under the Convention, jointly elaborate water quality objectives, develop concerted
action programmes, jointly monitor and assess transboundary waters, set up joint warning and
alarm systems, and provide mutual assistance in critical situations.
Governments will also undertake any additional action that may be required to protect human
health and safety. One of these measures is the preparation, under the auspices of UN ECE and
the European Regional Office of WHO, of a protocol on water and health expected to be adopted
at the 1999 London Ministerial Conference on Environment and Health. Its objective is to promote
the protection of human health and well being and sustainable development through improving
water management and preventing, controlling and reducing water-related disease.
At the international level there is no "supranational" enforcement mechanism for nations
that decline to follow even the agreements they have signed. Nonetheless, international
agreements do offer certain benefits, namely that they are formal, written, and embody
two or more countries' policy compromises (Box 7.5). They are also usually vetted and
approved by a majority of the national legislature before being signed.
Box 7.5 The Baltic Sea
The Baltic Sea, the largest body of brackish water on Earth, has notorious phenomena of blooms
of cyanobacteria. The understanding of the biology of the species of cyanobacteria involved and
their production of cyanotoxins is necessary for an effective water management of the Baltic Sea.
The problems related to such mass development of cyanobacteria illustrate the need to combine
efforts at the local level with national and international policies in order to improve the
environmental situation in this geographical area.
The Baltic Sea has a surface area of 374,000 km2 and a mean depth of approximately 60 m and
is subdivided into a number of areas: the Gulf of Bothnia in the northernmost part; the Finnish
Gulf, bordered by Finland, Russia and Estonia; the Gulf of Riga; the Baltic proper; the Gotland
Sea and the Bornholm Sea. The Baltic Sea is connected by narrow channels to the Kattegat and
Skagerrak that lead to the North Sea. The salinity gradient varies from 1-4 ‰ in the most eastern
and northern parts, to 7-8 ‰ in the south.
The Helsinki Commission has estimated the pollution loads entering the Baltic Sea (Helcom,
1993, 1997). Nutrient input from the atmosphere (through rainfall and particulate deposition) and
from the surrounding land by rivers and run-off is high. Elevated levels of nutrients in the water,
especially of phosphate and nitrogen compounds, stimulate the growth of cyanobacteria and
algae. In the Baltic Sea several cyanobacteria, such as the genera Nodularia and
Aphanizomennon, are capable of biological nitrogen fixation.
The cyanobacteria blooms that are typical of the Baltic Sea may cause a number of serious
problems: they discolour the water and may produce bad smells; the decomposition of their
organic matter may result in depletion of oxygen, which leads to the death of fish and other
animals; and cyanotoxins are produced with consequences to other living organisms, including
people.
Co-operation between the countries in the Baltic Sea region occupies a central position in the
field of environmental protection. A priority action plan that also addresses problems of blooms
has been made and is being operated by the governments in order to determine the major
problems and the main measures to reduce them (Ministry of the Environment of Finland, 1991).
7.3 Legislation, regulations, and standards
Making generalised observations about legislative frameworks is difficult, not least
because of the diverse forms they may take (common law, civil law, Islamic law) but also
because of the varied environments in which they operate. Nonetheless, it is possible to
identify certain principal characteristics of the (national) legislative framework within
which actions related to the control of cyanobacterial health risks may be effected.
7.3.1 Forms of legislation
The term "legislation" or "laws" refers broadly to all legal texts which are promulgated by
the legislative arm of the state exercising its legislative powers under the Constitution, or
by the executive arm of the state exercising either its own executive powers under the
Constitution or powers delegated to it from the legislative branch. A basic law is usually
introduced by a sector ministry and enacted by Parliament or other equivalent national
lawmaking body.
The term "subordinate legislation" (most commonly known as regulations but in some
jurisdictions denominated orders, notices, rules, schedules, bye-laws, ordinances,
instruments, directives, or proclamations) refers to all legal instruments promulgated by
the executive branch exercising delegated legislative power. Subsidiary regulations to a
particular law enacted by the national legislature are elaborated and issued by the
Minister with responsibility for the subject matter (with or without the approval of all other
Ministers, depending upon the country). There may also be schedules or annexes to the
regulations, consisting of even more detailed subject matter.
Under the principle of supremacy, laws adopted by the national legislature nearly always
take precedence over subsidiary regulations as well as over legal instruments adopted
by the legislative branches of the country's political subdivisions. In some countries,
however, a variant of this provides that legislation promulgated by the national
legislature has primacy for certain subject matters, whereas legislation by the local
legislatures takes precedence for others. In other constitutional systems, such as the
USA or Australia, any powers not expressly granted to the federal government (or
Commonwealth) in the Constitution are the responsibility of the states.
In addition to laws and regulations, there may be other administrative legal texts such as
rulings, circulars, guidelines, standards, administrative notes and decisions. Such legal
instruments, although non-binding, assist the governments in achieving the aims of the
umbrella legislation while at the same time providing guidance for private groups as to
how government authorities will go about enforcing and implementing the law
(Chiaradia-Bousquet, 1995).
7.3.2 Water laws and standards
Enactment of a basic water law is important in countries where there are laws covering
different subject matters and enacted at different times containing conflicting provisions
relating to water. This might occur, for example, amongst a country's environment
protection law, electricity law and public health regulations. However, during the process
of updating or replacing legislation on water, it should be kept in mind that the trend in
many countries is towards considering water issues in conjunction with other issues,
such as the conservation and use of land, rather than viewing them in isolation (Burchi,
1991).
In order to be effective in addressing cyanobacterial hazards, the law should refer to the
jurisdictions, responsibilities, and authority of specified competent agencies in relation to
water and to their relationships to one another. Thus it becomes the instrument which
brings together the diverse parts of the water medium from which problems arise, as well
as the diverse groups associated with their control. These groups include water users,
those constructing and administering water supply systems, those regulating different
aspects of water and having responsibilities in related domains, and agencies involved in
data and information management and sector planning (Table 7.1).
It is important for the water law to reflect the policy priorities and political realities of the
particular country. For example, in the case of drinking water supply, legislation in the
established market economies is orientated principally towards the regulation of
established water supplies administered by recognisable entities where extensive water
supply infrastructure is in place. This may have little relevance to countries where the
goal is principally to support the best use of available resources in the provision of
incrementally improved service standards to the population as a whole. Such differences
argue strongly for developing the policy for the particular country in light of its particular
legislative and policy framework, rather than relying on some sort of "model" legislation
which would not reflect the realities at hand.
Water laws generally follow the basic principle of national legislation, i.e., that a basic
law is indeed basic, whereas any details, which may have to be changed in response to
scientific advancements or other exigencies, are contained in the regulations or other
subsidiary legislation. The rationale is that regulations are more easily changed because
they are elaborated by the responsible Ministry and can be easily revoked, amended or
replaced, rather than having to go through the Parliamentary process.
Among the details which will normally form part of the subsidiary legislation of a water
law are standards of various kinds. For example, there may be standards on minimum
treatment requirements linked to source type and quality. Chapter 5 describes the levels
of safety provided by treatment regimes in relation to the nature and degree of
cyanobacteria-related hazards in the source water. However, standard setting should not
be restricted to water quality, but should also extend to water resource protection and
water supply service quality more generally. It should also extend beyond the simple
assessment of quality and include the adequacy of structures and systems, such as the
definition of safe facilities and practices, minimum standard specifications, and minimum
standard operating systems.
In some countries, service quality standards are contained in a "sanitary code" or "code
of good practice". As mentioned above in the discussion of industry codes, such
standards are most likely to receive support in their implementation if consultation with
the affected entities (e.g. supply agencies and professional bodies) has occurred. Other
standards consist of quality targets, or what are known as water quality standards.
Comprehensive guidance on the setting of drinking water quality standards is available
in the Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality (WHO, 1993). The Guidelines for the Safe
Use of Wastewater and Excreta in Agriculture and Aquaculture (Mara and Cairncross,
1989) are also available and further guidelines for safe recreational-water environments
are in preparation.
Table 7.2 outlines some of the many issues that may be addressed through water laws,
regulations and standards. Not all of these should be seen as essential components of
water legislation for all countries, because the contents of a particular country's laws,
regulations and standards depend on the policy priorities of that country. This table does
not attempt to indicate which matters "belong" in the basic law and which should be
contained in subsidiary legislation. Although the general principle (that the more detailed
material and the matters that may need to be changed should not be contained in the
basic law) applies, the precise dividing line depends to a large extent on the particular
legislative scheme. Other water management issues, which are not directly tied to a
particular water use, but which might also be addressed through legislation, are given in
Table 7.3.
The above discussion should make clear that legislation may play a positive, supportive
role in target setting, particularly by virtue of the inclusion of details (such as standards)
in subsidiary regulations. Nevertheless, penalties and other sanctions to assist in
enforcement are also included in most laws and will occasionally be used. In order to
moderate their use, it is appropriate that explicit schemes are provided for enforcement
implementation and that they are pursued (Jensen, 1967). The imposition of other more
innovative solutions, such as mandatory participation in working groups or monitoring
programmes, may obviate the need for some of the harsher penalties. Alternatively, any
of these may be used in combination (Box 7.6).
7.4 Awareness raising, communication and public participation
The understanding that cyanobacterial blooms and toxins present hazards to human and
animal health is a prerequisite for anticipating, avoiding or reducing their adverse effects.
Raising awareness on the causes and effects of cyanobacterial blooms serves two goals:
protection from the health hazards presented by the toxins, and long-term reduction of
toxic bloom development through public participation. Early recognition of blooms and
scums facilitates better management of the blooms and associated problems and helps
to reduce their impact on the community as a whole (NRA, 1990; NSWBGATF, 1992).
Table 7.2 Types of water use and features of laws, regulations and standards
Water use Area of
Main features of laws, regulations and standards
type regulation
Drinking Drinking water Place obligation to supply continuously safe water upon the
water supply quality supply agency
Require supply agency to exercise due care
Define what is "safe" in terms of acute or long-term exposure (for
cyanobacteria this would normally relate to concentrations of
some specific toxins (see Chapter 4) as well as toxins not
recognised at the time of standard formulation)
Monitoring Divide monitoring obligations amongst a number of agencies or
requirements sectors (public sector oversight of water resource management,
public health authorities, drinking water suppliers, and
recreational facility providers including local government)
Require information sharing amongst these agencies
Define the extent of monitoring required of each agency and
define the conditions under which monitoring should be
undertaken
Define the technical requirements against which monitoring
results would be compared
Treatment Require supply agency to treat water to achieve the required
requirements standards (may be implicit in the requirement of the basic law to
supply safe water)
Require newly constructed or rehabilitated supply systems to
reach minimum treatment capabilities (these may be formulated
in terms of performance criteria or processes required, generally
in relation to the characteristics of both the source water and the
supplied population)
Require the upgrading of existing systems to reach the standards
required of newly constructed or rehabilitated systems
Define technical details of construction or operating practice
Contingency Oblige government agencies to establish contingency plans
plans Define the conditions under which contingency planning is
required, and the type of contingency to be planned for (for Alert
Levels Framework, see Chapter 6)
Describe the basic components of an "adequate" plan (this may
include, for example, the need to have alternative supply capacity
in very high risk areas)
Recreational Recreational Impose a "duty of care" (the standard of reasonableness) on
waters water quality those promoting or offering the use of facilities for recreational
water use (both private facility owners or operators and local
governments may be bound by these duties)
Relate use types and water types or qualities to alert levels, and
associate alert levels with actions
Define a methodology for defining alert levels with consideration
for local conditions
Table 7.3 Water resources management: features of laws, regulations and standards
Management Main features of laws, regulations and standards
types
Pollution control Require companies to control pollution (this could be interpreted as imposing
a duty to control eutrophication and, by implication, cyanobacteria)
Impose duty on industry to address nutrient discharge (especially sewage)
and run-off
Require agencies to manage river flows to prevent cyanobacterial blooms
Integrated Define alert levels and associate specific actions with each level (see
management Chapter 6)
Include methodology for defining alert levels according to local conditions
Information and the Oblige government agencies to disclose information relating to public health
public risks
Define the levels of information to be disseminated according to the alert
level
Impose a duty on public health authorities to inform the public and other
government agencies of relevant risks
Require public education and define its contents (this is different from
disclosure)
Intersectoral co- Define roles of agencies and place responsibilities upon them
ordination
Require minimum frequency of co-ordination at national/local level and wider
consultation
Establish local procedures for co-ordination and consultation
Case histories (e.g. Bell and Codd, 1994; Ressom et al., 1994; Falconer, 1996; Codd et
al., 1997) and risk assessments (Chapter 4) point to the need for greater awareness of
cyanobacterial bloom and toxin hazards amongst not only water users (such as the
general public, water recreational groups and water resource managers), but also
professional groups. Awareness raising can serve several functions:
• To alert professionals and water users to the presence of hazardous accumulations of
cyanobacteria and toxins and to the risks involved in drinking and using water containing
blooms and toxins.
• To inform health-care professionals of the circumstances and exposure routes that
lead to intoxications.
• To inform water users of the causes of cyanobacterial bloom development and of ways
in which they can assist in reducing bloom formation.
• To inform environmental regulators, water user and water supply organisations about
cyanobacterial toxin hazards, and to help identify and implement appropriate policies on
water access, use, consumption and treatment.
Box 7.6 Imposition of a monitoring programme after prosecution of a local council for
serious environmental harm
In May 1996, the waste management officers responsible for the safe operation of sewage
treatment works in Tasmania, Australia, noted that a discharge was occurring from an almost
empty sewage treatment pond into a nearby dry watercourse. This was not allowed under the
terms of the operating licence. There was a dense bloom of Microcystis aeruginosa in the next
pond, and the officers observed pools containing Microcystis in the watercourse and scums of
blue-green slime along the banks and down into a recreational lake called Wrinklers Lagoon.
Water samples contained 511,000 cells per ml of Microcystis in the sewage pond and 144,000
cells per ml in a pool in the watercourse. Microcystin content in the pond was measured at 27 µg
ml-1, and the scum in the lake at 120 µg g-1 dry weight. Total nitrogen in the pond was 25.9 mg I-1,
and total phosphorus was 7.3 mg l-1. About 14 × 106 litres had been discharged from the sewage
pond into the lake, which had a volume of about 200 × 106 litres. The reason for the discharge
was a subsidence in the sewage pond retaining wall, which caused the operators to employ
repeated discharges from the pond to avoid collapse of the wall. Because the lake is a well-used
swimming and fishing location, the discharge caused an immediate health hazard and a long-
term risk of repeated blooms of toxic Microcystis. On receipt of the officers' report, the local
Council excavated the retaining sand bank of the lake and established a channel to the sea,
partly draining the lake and allowing sea water flushing.
Environment Tasmania, the state environmental protection agency, prosecuted the Council for
serious environmental harm on eight counts of discharge of sewage pond contents containing
toxic Microcystis into a recreational lake.
In discussions between the parties and an expert advisor, the Council proposed a monitoring
programme for the lake and a reduction of the severity of the charges. The magistrate hearing the
case found the Council guilty on a lesser charge of "material environmental harm", imposed a fine
of A$ 30,000 (approximately US$ 20,000) and directed that a monitoring programme be carried
out. The proposed monitoring programme was intended to make the lagoon safer with respect to
blooms of Microcystis (or Nodularia which can be handled in a similar way to blooms of
Microcystis); to improve the amenity value of the lagoon; and to minimise any risks to people,
pets, livestock, or fishermen eating fish from the lagoon. The monitoring programme was to be
reviewed after three years.
Source: FCR Cattell v. Break O'Day Council; Court of Petty Sessions, Launceston, Tasmania,
Australia. Complaint No. 9745521.
7.4.1 Professional group awareness
Professional groups are often no more cognisant of the circumstances leading to
cyanobacteria-associated health problems than are the general public (Skulberg et al.,
1984). The kinds of professional groups that require up-to-date information on
cyanobacterial blooms and toxins in order to manage effectively the associated
problems include water treatment and supply authorities and companies, medical and
veterinary practitioners, public and environmental health authorities, and national/state
environmental agencies. Initiatives to increase the awareness of these groups and
organisations have centred around conferences, workshops, correspondence in widely-
read professional journals, review-type papers, and the large-scale publication of
handbooks and reports. Such educational materials have been developed for the water
supply, treatment and environmental sectors (NRA, 1990; Lawton and Codd, 1991;
Carmichael, 1992; NSWBGATF, 1992; Yoo et al., 1995); the human health-care sector
(Codd and Roberts, 1991; Elder et al., 1993; Ressom et al., 1994), and the veterinary
sector (Codd, 1983; Beasley et al., 1989). In countries intending to address
cyanobacterial risks, these communication routes should be established and developed
further.
7.4.2 Public awareness
In some parts of the world, such as Australia, the UK and Scandinavia, cyanobacterial
awareness programmes have operated for several years. However, in other countries
with water resources and supplies containing toxic cyanobacterial blooms, awareness
and the availability of information are more limited. These deficiencies can be combated
in several ways. When cyanobacterial populations in water bodies exceed threshold
levels, media warnings should generally be issued to the public. Such warnings and
notifications may be issued through the newspapers, radio and television, and may
require media targeting and press conferences. The content of any announcement
varies according to individual bloom situations and the purposes for which the affected
water body is used. For example, if a cyanobacterial bloom occurs in a municipal water
supply source, media releases may be appropriate at lower cell populations than if the
waters are used only for recreational purposes.
The information supplied in the warnings should be prompt, concise and should include
details of expected changes in the quality of supply, such as tastes, odours,
discolouration and the actions being taken to alleviate the problems. Where recreational
activities, livestock watering, and further water uses other than human supply, are
involved, media warnings may also contain a brief description of the bloom and how it
can be recognised (such as a noticeable discolouration of the water or the presence of
scums). Other information which may be supplied in the warnings and notices, if
appropriate to the bloom situation, includes:
• Possible health problems including gastrointestinal upsets, skin rashes, and eye
irritations.
• Warnings not to use the water for swimming, bathing, or showering.
• Advice on finding alternate sources of water for animals and preventing pets from
swimming (and subsequently grooming scum material out of their fur) in affected areas.
• Notification that boiling the water will not destroy the toxins.
The community often has several concerns when a cyanobacterial bloom occurs in its
drinking water supply or recreational amenity. Commonly-asked questions concern the
use of water in evaporative air coolers; its use for drinking, laundry, dish washing,
washing fruits and vegetables and cooking; whether fish, shellfish and crustaceans
harvested from cyanobacterial bloom-containing water are suitable for human
consumption; and where to obtain alternative water supplies. Information or fact sheets
prepared in advance can be circulated upon request (see below).
It may be appropriate to display warning signs and notices at major points of public
access to affected water bodies. For eutrophic waters with occasional bloom problems,
provision of basic information to visitors is particularly likely to contribute to protecting
them from health hazards, because the rapid appearance and disappearance of scums
cannot always be detected in time for the responsible authorities to implement specific
measures (such as temporarily restricting use). In such situations, health protection must,
to some extent, rely on the users' own informed judgement.
Warning signs should be prominent and simple, with symbols or minimum text to
indicate no swimming, paddling, drinking, livestock watering, pets in the water, or other
activities deemed by the responsible agencies to present unacceptable exposure risks.
The signs may be removed when the blooms decrease to acceptable levels, or they may
be kept in place throughout the year in areas with year-round problems. If the latter
option is taken, the gradual decrease in visual impact of warning signs and notices
needs to be borne in mind.
Brochures and fact sheets are other tools which are increasingly used to convey to the
general public and specialist water user groups information on the appearance and
hazards presented by cyanobacterial blooms and scums. Examples are available from
several countries which have experienced bloom-related problems, such as the UK,
Australia, Denmark, Finland, South Africa, and the USA (NRA, 1990; NSWBGATF, 1992;
Yoo et al., 1995).
Brochures and fact sheets intended for the public should be simple and free of scientific
jargon, and should include brief descriptions with the following kinds of information:
• The nature and occurrence of cyanobacteria.
• The health hazards presented by cyanobacteria and their toxins.
• The recognition of cyanobacterial blooms and scums.
• The propensity of cyanobacteria to produce toxins.
• Precautions and steps to be taken to avoid potential health problems.
• Whom to contact if the presence of a cyanobacterial bloom or scum is suspected.
Special fact sheets for farmers, regarding protection of farm water supplies for animals,
and also for water sports organisations, have also been used. Professional associations
and user-group networks, such as national water sports bodies, provide a useful means
of spreading information. Posters and displays in public places and association premises
are additional tools for conveying information to the public on cyanobacteria and for
increasing community awareness. Videos are another useful method of educating the
public about cyanobacterial problems. They can be used to present the causes and
consequences of cyanobacterial blooms, as well as to provide good visual examples of
waters containing blooms and scums. They may also outline the strategies proposed
and used by authorities to manage the problems, and to inform the public about what, as
individuals, they can do to help. For example, to inform the public and to enable them to
initiate action at a community level, Australia's Murray-Darling Basin Commission (Box
7.3) initiated and supported the development of a "study circle" kit for adults entitled
"Blooming Blue-Green Algae". The kit contains a video, an audiotape, posters and
printed information on cyanobacteria which enables people to discuss and find out more
about cyanobacteria.
Education on the causes of blooms can begin through programmes run in schools.
Students may be encouraged to participate in simple water quality investigations, such
as in the Australian "Streamwatch" programme. Easy-to-use kits are employed to enable
the early detection of impending cyanobacterial blooms.
The effectiveness of the tools discussed above is only as good as the efforts made to
publicise and to distribute them. The need for contact points may be especially important
in remote locations where monitoring waters by government agencies or water body
owners is not possible and thus the assistance of the community is vital.
7.5 References
Anon 1992 Agenda 21: Programme of Action for Sustainable Development. United
Nations, New York.
Beasley, V.R., Cook, W.O., Dahlem, A.M., Hooser, S.B., Lovell, R.A. and Valentine,
W.M. 1989 Algae intoxication in livestock and water fowl. din. Toxicol., 5, 345-336.
Beasley, V.R., Cook, W.O., Dahlem, A.M., Hooser, S.B., Lovell, R.A. and Valentine,
W.M. 1994 Algae intoxication in livestock and water fowl. Microbiology, 5, 256-264.
Burchi, S. 1991 Current developments and trends in the law and administration of water
resources - A comparative state-of-the-art appraisal. J. Environ. Law, 3(1).
Carmichael, W.W. 1992 A Status Report on Planktonic Cyanobacteria (Blue-Green
Algae) and their Toxins. EPA/600/R-92/079, United States Environmental Protection
Agency, Cincinnati, Ohio.
Chiaradia-Bousquet, J.-P. 1995 Legislation. Legal Office Information Brief, Food and
Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
Codd, G.A. 1983 Cyanobacterial poisoning hazard in British freshwaters. Vet. Rec., 113,
223-224.
Codd, G.A. and Roberts, C. [Eds] 1991 Public Health Aspects of Cyanobacteria (Blue-
Green Algae). Proceedings of a Seminar, London, 14 June 1991. Pub. Hlth Lab. Service
Microbiol. Digest, 8, 78-100.
Codd, G.A, Ward, C.J. and Bell, S.G. 1997 Cyanobacterial toxins: occurrence, modes of
action, health effects and exposure routes. In: J.P. Seiler and E. Vilanova [Eds] Applied
Toxicology: Approaches through Basic Science. Archives of Toxicology Supplement 19,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 399-410.
Elder, G.H., Hunter, P.R. and Codd, G.A. 1993 Hazardous freshwater Cyanobacteria
(blue-green algae). Lancet, 341, 1519-1520.
Falconer, I.R. 1996 Potential impact on human health of toxic Cyanobacteria. Phycologia,
35 (Supplement 6), 6-11.
Helcom 1993 Second Baltic Sea Pollution Load Compilation. Baltic Sea Environ. Proc.
No 45, ISSN 0357-2994, Hamburg, 161 pp.
Helcom 1997 Baltic Marine Environment Bibliography. Baltic Sea Environ. Proc. No. 66,
ISSN 0357-2994, Espoo, 172 pp.
Jensen, P. 1967 Examination of water supply and drinking-water. Dan. Med. Bull., 14(1),
273-280.
Lawton, L.A. and Codd, G.A. 1991 Cyanobacterial (blue-green algal) toxins and their
significance in UK and European waters. J. Inst. Wat. Env. Man., 5, 460-465.
Mara, D. and Cairncross, S. 1989 Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater and
Excreta in Agriculture and Aquaculture. Published in collaboration with the United
Nations Environment Programme by World Health Organization, Geneva.
MDBC 1993 Algal Management Strategy Technical Advisory Group Report. Murray-
Darling Basin Commission, Canberra.
Ministry of the Environment of Finland 1991 Environmental Priority Action Programme
for Leningrad, Leningrad Region, Karelia and Estonia. Synthesis report, Plancenter Ltd.,
Helsinki, 193 pp.
Murray Darling Basin Ministerial Council 1994 The Algal Management Strategy. Murray
Darling Basin Ministerial Council, Canberra.
Nanni, M. 1996 The Aral Sea Basin: Legal and institutional issues. RECIEL, 5(2).
NRA 1990 Toxic Blue-Green Algae. Water Quality Series No. 2., The National Rivers
Authority, London, 125 pp.
NSWBGATF 1992 Blue-Green Algae. Final Report of the New South Wales Blue-green
Algal Task Force, New South Wales Department of Water Resources, Parramatta,
Australia, 159 pp.
NSWBGATF 1993 Blue-Green Algae. First Annual Report of the New South Wales Blue-
green Algal Task Force, New South Wales Department of Water Resources, Parramatta,
Australia.
Ressom., R., Soong, F.S., Fitzgerald, J., Turczynowicz, L., El Saadi, O., Roder, D.,
Maynard, T. and Falconer, I.R. 1994 Health Effects of Cyanobacteria (Blue-Green
Algae). National Health and Medical Research Council, Canberra, 108 pp.
Schaefer, M. 1981 Intersectoral Coordination and Health in Environmental Management.
An Examination of National Experience. Public Health Papers No. 74, World Health
Organization, Geneva.
Skulberg, O.M., Codd, G.A. and Carmichael, W.W. 1984 Toxic blue-green algal blooms
in Europe: a growing problem. Ambio, 13, 244-247.
UN ECE 1992 Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses
and International Lakes, Helsinki, 17 March 1992. United Nations Economic Commission
for Europe, United Nations, New York.
WHO 1993 Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality, Second edition. Volume 1,
Recommendations. World Health Organization, Geneva.
Yoo, R.S., Carmichael, W.W., Hoehn, R.C. and Hrudey, S.E. 1995 Cyanobacterial (Blue-
Green Algal) Toxins: A Resource Guide. American Waterworks Association Research
Foundation, Denver, Colorado, 222 pp.
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health consequences,
monitoring and management
Edited by Ingrid Chorus and Jamie Bartram
© 1999 WHO
ISBN 0-419-23930-8
Chapter 8. PREVENTATIVE MEASURES
This chapter was prepared by Ingrid Chorus and Luuc Mur
Cyanobacterial bloom formation can be avoided by measures which address their
growth requirements, i.e. plant nutrients and light. The basis for excessive growth of
cyanobacteria and other phytoplankton organisms (planktonic algae) is enrichment of
aquatic ecosystems with plant nutrients. This process is termed eutrophication. The key
nutrient in many cases is phosphate. In some systems, not all of the phosphate available
is actually used for phytoplankton growth because other resources limit the maximum
possible biomass. These may be light intensity or availability of nitrogen. Furthermore,
other biota can affect the growth of cyanobacteria and phytoplankton organisms:
submerged aquatic plants may compete for nutrients, and grazing by zooplankton may
reduce the stock of many phytoplankton organisms and (to a lesser extent) also of some
cyanobacteria.
The key management action for abatement of Cyanobacterial blooms is to address the
source of the problem by control and reduction of external nutrient loading to the water
body, and thus of the concentrations within it. Measures addressing light availability
directly (e.g. artificial mixing) or targeting the community structure of the biocoenosis (e.g.
biomanipulation) have been successful chiefly in less eutrophic situations. For highly
eutrophic water bodies under restoration by reduction of nutrient loading, such measures
may accelerate and enhance success.
Control and reduction of nutrient loading usually focuses on phosphorus (for the reasons
discussed in section 8.1), but measures addressing phosphorus may be designed to
reduce nitrogen input simultaneously. Targets for nutrient concentrations can be
achieved by following basic principles of good catchment management with respect to
agriculture and sewage treatment. This chapter aims to assist decision making by giving
information on:
• Target values for phosphorus concentrations likely to control cyanobacterial blooms in
a given water body.
• The potential impact of hydrophysical and biological methods for control of specific
Cyanobacterial ecostrategists (see section 2.3) in a given water body.
• The likelihood of success of poorly substantiated methods, sometimes propagated with
remarkably effective marketing strategies.
A decision tree for application of different management approaches in order to control
phytoplankton growth is given in Reynolds (1997). It leads from restriction of all sources
of phosphorus enrichment to enhancing flushing or sediment removal, biomanipulation
and artificial destratification. Reynolds (1997) points out that decision points for
application of measures are still being quantified by current research.
8.1 Carrying capacity
The concept of the carrying capacity of the resources in a given ecosystem to sustain a
population has proved very helpful in planning measures to control the size of that
population; Applied to cyanobacteria, this means asking questions such as:
• How much biomass can be sustained on the basis of the amount of nitrogen available?
• How much biomass can be sustained on the basis of the amount of phosphorus
available?
• How much biomass can be sustained with the amount of light that penetrates into the
water?
At any one point in time, it is likely that one of these three resources will limit the
possible amount of biomass at a lower biomass level than the others. However, the
limiting resource may change seasonally, for example at higher latitudes it changes in
relation to the angular height of the sun and day length, and in tropical climates it
frequently changes in relation to turbidity changes caused by seasonality of the flow
regime. During winter (even in clear water) or in turbid situations, light is usually the
limiting factor, whereas the available nitrogen and phosphorus could have allowed a
higher level of biomass. As light intensity increases in spring or as water becomes
clearer, phytoplankton organisms begin to multiply and incorporate available nitrogen
and phosphorus into their biomass, often up to the point where either of these resources
is depleted in the environment and further growth is not possible. If nutrient
concentrations are excessively high, phytoplankton may reach a density that causes
such a high level of turbidity that light availability limits any further growth, and in these
situations populations will be light- rather than nutrient-limited.
For planning and management, it is important to be able to estimate which of the key
resources (light, nitrogen or phosphorus) is likely to control phytoplankton biomass in
any given system. In other words, the questions are:
• Which resource determines the carrying capacity for phytoplankton?
• How high is the carrying capacity?
For a first step in answering this, it is not important to differentiate between
cyanobacteria and other phytoplankton, because the maximum amount of phytoplankton
possible can be equal to the maximum amount of cyanobacteria possible, once
cyanobacteria have become dominant. One approach at estimating the carrying capacity
in relation to nitrogen and phosphorus is to look at the relative amounts of these
nutrients in phytoplankton biomass, known as Redfield Ratio by mass (Round, 1965).
These ratios are:
C H O N P
42 8.5 57 7 1
Among these components, hydrogen and oxygen are never limiting in aquatic
environments. Carbon is available as carbon dioxide (CO ) and is consumed by
2
photosynthesis. Consumption of dissolved CO enhances diffusion of atmospheric CO
2 2
into the water, a process which takes time. Carbon limitation has been extensively
investigated and has been summarised by Reynolds (1997). He concluded that CO
2
limitation can occasionally have an impact, particularly in soft-water lakes with low
bicarbonate alkalinity, but that these situations are generally brief and do not
substantially limit the maximal amount of biomass possible.
8.1.1 Nitrogen
Nitrogen may enter water bodies as leachate from soils, as run-off from animal feedlots,
and from untreated or biologically-treated sewage, unless treatment includes nitrification
and denitrification. Phytoplankton can take up inorganic dissolved nitrogen in the form of
nitrate, nitrite and ammonia. In some arid continental regions, nitrogen is found to be the
chief factor limiting phytoplankton growth (Reynolds, 1997). The relevance of nitrogen to
limitation of cyanobacterial biomass is under debate, because a number of
cyanobacterial taxa can compensate for its lack by fixing atmospheric nitrogen at rates
of up to 175 kg ha-1a-1 (Rönicke, 1986). Thus, lack of dissolved inorganic nitrogen may
actually support the dominance of such species as Anabaena and Aphanizomenon.
However, these taxa also occur under conditions of surplus inorganic nitrogen. More
importantly, nitrogen fixation is a process requiring high amounts of light energy and will
not be effective in very turbid waters (as is the case during dense algal blooms). Thus, in
a given water body the maximum amount of biomass that can grow, in addition to the
biomass already present, can be estimated from the Redfield Ratio (see above) on the
basis of the concentrations of dissolved inorganic nitrogen.
8.1.2 Phosphorus
Phosphorus, like nitrogen, enters water bodies from untreated and from biologically
treated sewage, and further treatment steps are required to eliminate it. Phosphorus is
biologically available as phosphate, which binds to soil particles more effectively than
nitrate. Thus, the main entry route into water bodies from land areas is as surface run-off
and with erosion. Although biomass needs only about one seventh of the amount of
phosphorus as it needs of nitrogen, phosphorus is the resource which most frequently
limits phytoplankton growth in aquatic environments. Cyanobacteria and many other
phytoplankton organisms have developed storage mechanisms for phosphate (known as
luxury uptake). These enable them to store enough phosphate for 3-4 cell divisions. As a
consequence, one cell can multiply into 8-16 cells without requiring any further
phosphate uptake, and biomass can increase by a factor of 10 or more even when
dissolved phosphate is entirely depleted. For this reason, the amount of biomass that
can grow in addition to the biomass present cannot be predicted from the concentrations
of dissolved phosphate (see Box 8.1).
Phosphorus is naturally abundant only in very few aquatic ecosystems (such as some
lowland estuaries, some volcanic lakes and some ground-water-fed lakes). Furthermore,
its inputs to aquatic environments are often easier to control than nitrogen inputs.
Methods for elimination of phosphorus from domestic sewage are well developed and
currently more cost-effective than nitrification and denitrification (although current
developments may provide better approaches to combined elimination of both nutrients).
Measures to protect soils from erosion can also be very effective against loss of
phosphorus, whereas control of nitrate leachate from over-fertilised soils may be more
difficult. Nitrogen limitation may be to some extent compensated by fixation of
atmospheric nitrogen by cyanobacteria, whereas there is no comparable compensation
mechanism for phosphorus.
8.1.3 Available light energy
Light energy is a critical resource indirectly affected by nutrient concentrations. Light
arriving at a water surface is partly reflected, and the remainder is very quickly absorbed
by the water itself as well as by the dissolved substances and by the suspended
particles in the water. An upper limit of phytoplankton cell density is reached when the
cells shade each other to such an extent that further growth is no longer possible
because the individual cells do not receive enough light. This level can be estimated
following Lambert-Beer's basic law of exponential extinction with increasing thickness of
the water layer. This law can be expressed as:
where I is the intensity at depth Z
Z
I' is the surface intensity
o
ε is the vertical extinction coefficient, which in turn is the sum of extinction by the water
itself and the substances dissolved in it such as humic acids ε , the algae suspended in
w
the water ε , and other particles suspended in the water ε .
a p
The average amount of light I* available to a phytoplankton organism entrained in
vertical mixing of the entire water body or (under conditions of thermal stratification)
within the upper, warm water layer (the epilimnion) is the square root of the intensity at
the surface I and at the bottom of the mixed layer or of the water body I (Reynolds,
o m
1997). This relationship illustrates the decisive influence of depth on light availability and
enables estimation of the carrying capacity for phytoplankton biomass. For otherwise
clear water with the sum of ε and ε being only 0.2, Reynolds (1997) uses chlorophyll as
w p
a measure of phytoplankton biomass and demonstrates that at 1 m depth and a daily
insulation of 10-3 mol photons m-1 s-1 a maximum of 670 µg l-1 of chlorophyll may be
sustained, whereas at a mixed depth of 10 m, only 49 µg l-1 are possible, and if mixing
occurs down to 30 m, carrying capacity declines to only 3 µg l-1 chlorophyll. At these
phytoplankton biomass levels, turbidity has also increased (expressed as increase of the
term εa), and not enough light can penetrate to enable further growth.
Nutrient availability often influences light limitation. If nutrients are limiting, phytoplankton
cannot grow to density levels that reach the light-determined carrying capacity. If nutrient
concentrations are excessive, phytoplankton will reach the biomass limit determined by
light (unless other factors such as hydrological flushing prevent growth). Further
increase of nutrient concentrations will then have no further effect on phytoplankton
biomass. This is often the case in hypertrophic water bodies. Turbid situations where the
light-determined carrying capacity has been reached are often dominated by
cyanobacteria, because at low light intensity these have a higher growth rate than many
other phytoplankton organisms (see section 2.2).
8.2 Target values for total phosphorus within water bodies
In determining target values of phosphorus within water bodies to control cyanobacterial
blooms, two questions are important:
• What phytoplankton biomass density can be expected at a given concentration of total
phosphorus?
• At what threshold concentration of total phosphorus does phytoplankton density create
a turbidity level high enough to reach the light-determined carrying capacity, and thus
switch a water body from total phosphorus control of biomass to control by light limitation?
Finding answers to these questions requires a clear definition of total phosphorus. In the
past, the soluble phosphate fractions have frequently been addressed when dealing with
eutrophication issues. This has some predictive value if it can be measured in seasons
where very little phytoplankton is present to consume dissolved phosphate (e.g. during
severe light limitation in winter), and if inputs are fairly constant throughout the year.
However, the carrying capacity for phytoplankton biomass is more reliably analysed in
terms of the total amount of phosphate, i.e. the sum of phosphate bound in biomass and
phosphate dissolved in the water, known as total phosphorus (Box 8.1).
Box 8.1 Monitoring total phosphorus as opposed to soluble phosphate fractions
Considerable confusion prevails in the use of the term "phosphate". Historically, soluble reactive
phosphate (SRP) or orthophosphate has been measured and addressed when dealing with
phytoplankton growth, because this is the fraction of total phosphate which is directly available for
uptake by cyanobacteria and algae. However, recycling of phosphate molecules within the
plankton communities has proved to be extremely rapid (within 5-100 minutes) (Wetzel, 1983),
and phosphate liberated by degradation of organic material will be taken up by bacteria and algae
faster than scientists can sample and measure it. Furthermore, cyanobacteria and algae can
store enough phosphate for up to four cell divisions and increase 16-fold, even if no soluble
reactive phosphate could be measured. If SRP is found above detection limits, this means that it
is surplus to the requirements of the cyanobacteria and algae. The only informational value of
such a finding is that growth is limited by some factor other than phosphate. The upper limit of the
biomass of cyanobacteria and/or algae that can develop in a given water body is, therefore, often
largely determined by the amount of phosphate bound within the cells, and total phosphate
phosphorus is the variable that should be studied for biomass management. This variable is not
equivalent to total phosphorus, which includes the mineral form (such as apatite) unavailable for
biological uptake. However, mineral forms are of quantitative importance only in some water
bodies (e.g. with high silt loading) and, for the sake of simplification, total phosphorus has
become widely used to represent total phosphate phosphorus.
The term total phosphorus is preferable to the term total phosphate, because results are reported
in terms of phosphorus rather than phosphate. This is important because the weight of the PO
4
molecule is about three times that of its central P atom, and lack of specification in reporting
results as to whether they refer to µg PO or µg P has caused considerable confusion in the
4
literature.
For predicting phytoplankton density from total phosphorus concentrations several
models have been developed. The most comprehensive statistical model was
established through an international (largely European and North American) co-
operative study organised by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) (Vollenweider and Kerekes, 1982). The concentration of
chlorophyll a was used as an easy-to-analyse measure for phytoplankton density. Data
for annual mean values of chlorophyll a and for maxima of chlorophyll a were compiled
from a wide variety of phosphorus-limited lakes (77 for annual means and 50 for maxima)
and related to annual mean concentrations of total phosphorus. The resulting
regressions were almost linear and highly significant (Figure 8.1).
The result roughly means that per microgram of total phosphorus, an annual mean
phytoplankton biomass corresponding to 0.25 µg of chlorophyll a, and a maximum of up
to 1 µg of chlorophyll a, may be expected. These results, together with results on the
occurrence of cyanotoxins given in Chapter 3, can be used as a basis for rough guide
values for estimation of maximum cyanobacterial bloom biomass and toxin
concentrations. In natural ecosystems, 1 µg of total phosphorus can support a biomass
up to 100 µg of organic substance (corresponding to approximately 1 µg of chlorophyll a),
which in turn may contain up to 1 µg microcystin. Substantially higher biomass and
higher microcystin content are possible, but occur only through accumulation of cells in
surface scums, or in some laboratory cultures.
Regressions, such as the OECD model illustrated in Figure 8.1, can be applied as
management tools to predict the average and the maximum phytoplankton biomass
range likely at a given concentration of total phosphorus. However, this approach has
been criticised because these models integrate the behaviour of a number of lakes
rather than the response of any one lake to changes in phosphorus concentrations. It
must be emphasised that regression B is useful to estimate the maximum phytoplankton
biomass at a given phosphorus concentration. However, the estimate given by the
double logarithmic regression is only rough, the scatter of points within the 95 per cent
confidence limits covers a factor of 10. Maximum ratios of chlorophyll to total
phosphorus of 2 are still within this limit. This scatter reflects the effects of other
environmental factors controlling phytoplankton biomass, particularly depth and mixing
conditions, and losses due to grazing of algae and some cyanobacteria by zooplankton.
The carrying capacity for phosphorus will not have been reached in all of the lakes
among the wide variety used for regression B. Further management actions in addition
to phosphorus control may be useful to avoid this carrying capacity being reached, i.e. to
move the vertical position of a water body downwards in Figure 8.1.
Predictability of maximum biomass levels is enhanced by combining this model of
phosphorus-determined carrying capacity with a measure for light-determined carrying
capacity by introducing the threshold concentrations where phosphorus limitation
switches to light limitation. This requires knowledge of the depth of the water body and, if
it is thermally stratified, knowledge of the depth of the warm upper mixed layer
(epilimnion), also termed "mixing depth" Z . If data on light extinction are available as
m
outlined above, average light intensity through the mixing depth I* can be calculated. In
absence of such data, light availability can be estimated by regarding Z in relation to
m
the depth of light penetration (euphotic depth, Z ). If mixing is deep in relation to light
eu
penetration, cell or colony densities cannot become very high, because the deeply
entrained cells would be spending too much time in the dark. If mixing is shallow, cells
are frequently moved near the surface, where enough light can penetrate, even through
a dense suspension, to enable extensive proliferation.
Figure 8.1 Vollenweider/OECD regressions for phytoplankton biomass (as chlorophyll a).
A. Annual means;
B. Maxima in relation to total phosphorus, amended with threshold levels for
different mixing depths (Z ) taken from Reynolds (1997) at which carrying
m
capacity is limited by light (ε + ε m-1 = 0.2). Dotted lines represent 95% confidence
w p
intervals of the regressions
The maximum biomass density which can be reached is higher in lakes with shallow
mixing depths than in deeply mixed lakes, because the latter reach their light-determined
carrying capacity at a much lower level of biomass. Figure 8.1B gives the chlorophyll
levels at which light limitation truncates phosphorus limitation for different mixed depths
in otherwise clear water (εw+ εp = 0.2 m-1), and further phosphorus input will not result in
a further biomass increase. In turbid waters (e.g. due to silt loads), this level will be
reached at much lower phosphorus concentrations (see Reynolds (1997) for chlorophyll
capacities at higher light extinction coefficients).
When designing programmes to reduce cyanobacterial proliferation in highly eutrophic
lakes, total phosphorus concentrations must be reduced below the threshold value for
phosphate limitation of biomass in a given lake in order to have an effect; this threshold
value will depend upon the depth of the lake. However, once phosphorus levels have
been brought below the threshold value the OECD model can be applied. For example,
if a shallow drinking water resource has total phosphorus levels of 600 µg l-1 and
cyanobacterial densities corresponding to 200 µg l-1 chlorophyll a, and if restoration
measures are applied that achieve total phosphorus levels of 200 µg l-1, the annual mean
chlorophyll a concentration is likely to decline to 70 µg l-1. Although this is a step in the
right direction, cyanobacterial biomass is still very high and problems of bloom formation
are not yet resolved.
Experience collected during the past two decades with restoration of water ecosystems
shows that phosphorus control for abatement of cyanobacterial blooms should target
concentrations at least as low as 30-50 µg l-1 total phosphorus (Cooke et al., 1993). In
many water bodies, substantial reduction of cyanobacterial and algal population density
can be expected at these concentrations when compared with higher concentrations.
However, significantly lower total phosphorus concentrations (less than 10 µg l-1) may be
required, particularly in deep lakes, in order to prevent blooms of some stratifying
ecostrategists in the long term. Information on the prevalent ecostrategists within the
cyanobacterial population will help to predict the success of management measures (see
section 2.3 and Box 8.2).
Box 8.2 Thresholds for phosphorus control of different cyanobacterial ecostrategists
Knowledge of the prevalent ecotypes in a given water body leads to the following consequences
for total phosphorus management:
• If scum-forming ecostrategists prevail (such as Microcystis spp. or Anabaena spp.) cell numbers
and biomass are likely to decline if total phosphorus concentrations can be brought well below 50
µg I-1 P. This will also reduce scum formation, because less cells and colonies will be available to
concentrate into scums. Nonetheless, some scums will probably continue to occur until
phosphorus limitation becomes so severe that cell density (and therefore turbidity) decreases to
the point where the depth of light penetration is as deep as the depth of large areas of the water
body (Z = Z ). Under these conditions, vertical migration of these taxa is less effective because
eu m
their buoyancy regulating mechanism requires some time in the dark (see section 2.2). Therefore,
they lose their competitive advantage over other phytoplankton.
• If dispersed ecostrategists prevail (such as the filamentous species Planktothrix agardhii,
formerly named Oscillatoria agardhii) very pronounced "switches" may be expected. As
phosphorus limitation reduces filament density, and thus turbidity, to the point where the
relationship of the depth of light penetration to the depth of the mixed layer (Z /Z ) is greater
eu m
than 0.4, these species are likely to disappear quite abruptly, and turbidity will increase even
further, thus stabilising the result.
• If metalimnetic ecostrategists prevail (such as Planktothrix rubescens), the water layer above
these cells is usually quite clear. Very low concentrations of total phosphorus (often below 10 µg
I-1 P) are necessary to decrease turbidity further and thus increase light intensity down to the
depth inhabited by these species. If this can be achieved, metalimnetic ecotypes may disappear.
If not, hydrophysical measures may be more successful in controlling their density.
• If nitrogen fixing ecotypes prevail (such as Anabaena spp.), reduction of total phosphorus down
to concentrations effectively limiting biomass will cause dissolved nitrogen concentrations in
excess of uptake by phytoplankton. Nitrogen fixation is then no longer an advantage in
competition over other cyanobacteria and algae. This may induce disappearance of the nitrogen
fixing species.
8.3 Target values for total phosphorus inputs to water bodies
The OECD study, which provided the regression shown in Figure 8.1, evaluated data
from 87 lakes with respect to the relationship between total phosphorus concentrations
in the lake (annual means) and the external load (input) (Vollenweider and Kerekes,
1982). The regression showed a close correlation between annual means of in-lake
concentrations and the annual means of inlet concentrations in relation to the residence
time of the water:
Table 8.1 Permissible and dangerous inputs for phosphorus and nitrogen for different
depths and for a renewal time of 2 m3 m-2 a-1
Mean depth (m) Permissible inputs1 Dangerous inputs
P (g m-2 a-1) N (g m-2 a-1) P (g m-2 a-1) N (g m-2 a-1)
<5 <0.07 <1.0 >0.13 >2.0
<10 <0.1 <1.5 >0.2 >3.0
<50 <0.25 <4.0 >0.5 >8.0
<100 <0.4 <6.0 >0.8 >12.0
<150 <0.5 <7.5 >1.0 >15.0
<200 <0.6 <9.0 >1.2 >18.0
1 Permissible inputs increases with residence time; a doubling of the residence time
increases the permissible inputs by a factor of 1.6
Source: Harper, 1992
The "safe loadings" given in Table 8.1 were derived from this model. The model may
serve for preliminary scaling of measures to reduce inputs of phosphorus. For prediction
of the total phosphorus concentrations in a given water body, estimates of inputs from
inlets, from surface run-off (especially from agricultural areas with tillage, fertilisation and
erosion), from urban storm-water outfalls and from atmospheric precipitation are needed.
Acquiring all of the necessary data may be difficult, and approaches to estimates are
discussed in the context of lake and reservoir diagnosis by Cooke et al. (1993).
Currently, very little information on relationships between inputs and in-lake
concentrations is available from tropical and subtropical aquatic ecosystems. Future
research must investigate whether relationships established for water bodies in
temperate climates apply, or whether changes are necessary. Differences may be
expected, especially with respect to sediment-water interactions and mineralisation rates,
because these depend strongly upon temperature and upon thermal stratification.
If inputs exceed critical values for a given system, increase of the concentrations of total
phosphorus within that system are likely. In turn, cyanobacterial proliferation is likely,
and management measures are then needed to reduce phosphorous inputs.
8.4 Sources and reduction of external nutrient inputs
In most cases, eutrophication is enhanced by anthropogenic activities. The three major
sources of external nutrient inputs are run-off and erosion from fertilised agricultural
areas, erosion resulting from deforestation, and sewage. Exceptions may occur and are
illustrated by the example of Lake Victoria. This large lake has an area of 68, 000 km2.
Tributaries supply about 15 per cent of its water and 85 per cent originates from
precipitation. Burning of field stubble is widely practised and leads to substantial air
pollution. Thus, 60 per cent of the phosphorus load is estimated to enter Lake Victoria
through precipitation. Only 40 per cent originates from sewage and run-off into the
tributaries (Lindenschmidt et al., 1998). Replacement of the practice of burning stubble
would substantially reduce this load.
Sustainable approaches aim at reducing nutrient loads at their source or as close to the
source as possible (sections 8.4.1 and 8.4.2). If this is not feasible, approaches to
reducing inputs from a main tributary (i.e. treating a main tributary as if it were a sewage
channel) may be considered (sections 8.4.3). Reduction of external inputs beneath the
threshold expected to be effective is an important basis for the success of further in-lake
restoration measures (which may address internal nutrient loads or ecosystem structure,
see section 8.5).
The first questions to ask in designing programmes for abatement of eutrophication by
improving agricultural practices and/or by introducing or improving sewage treatment are:
• How high is the phosphorus input from wastewater (sewerage outfalls or diverse small
sewage inlets) to a given water body (excretion of 2-4 g P per person per day may be
assumed) (Siegrist and Boiler, 1996)?
• How high is the input from agriculture and run-off from other surfaces?
• Down to what concentrations must phosphorus input be reduced in order to reduce
concentrations in the receiving water body beneath a total P threshold likely to be
effective in the given water body (see section 8.2)?
Answering these questions requires specific evaluation of the resources to be protected,
of their catchment land use, and of the water and effluent drainage network. Ideally,
nutrient inputs and the relative share of different nutrient sources should be estimated
and catchment characteristics, such as soil type, run-off potential and vegetation cover
should be considered. In a region with nutrient-rich, erodible soils and reduced
vegetation cover or natural eutrophication (e.g. river deltas or some tropical areas),
reductions in inputs will not be possible to the same extent as in a region with sandy
soils, flat relief and dense tree cover (Cooke et al., 1993). Thus, the same measures and
similar investments into reducing inputs are likely to be more successful in reducing
eutrophication in a potentially oligotrophic ecosystem than in a naturally eutrophic one.
In many cases, quantitative assessments of inputs will not readily be available because
this requires detailed analysis of hydrological conditions (e.g. assessment of stream flow
rates and water retention times), as well as nutrient concentrations and their variations
over time in all of the main tributaries. Such investigations require time and resources.
Whereas inputs from point sources like sewage effluents are relatively easy to assess,
diffuse inputs from agriculture are often very difficult to quantify. Managers are likely to
be confronted with water bodies for which almost no limnological data are available, and
perhaps not even the depth contours of the water body are known. Planning and
implementation of resource protection measures may be delayed for several years
before reliable data become available. The dilemma for managers is whether to begin
with measures to reduce obviously substantial inputs, without having the data basis to
predict whether the measures taken will reduce nutrient concentrations below the
threshold effective for controlling cyanobacteria, or whether to delay planning and
decision-making until data become available.
In some countries, user friendly "decision support" software programs (see Box 8.3)
have been compiled for use by managers and community groups in identifying the main
sources of nutrients from a catchment, and for identifying possible actions e.g. off-river
disposal of wastewaters or (re) construction of riparian buffer strips to protect against
inputs from erosion. There is an array of computer models that may be used to simulate
the hydrodynamic and transport conditions in a catchment system. Trudgill (1995) gives
examples of available models and profound discussions of various processes that may
be included in the compilation. Since numerous parameters are required for calibration
of these models, the complexity of the model should be tailored to the extent of the data
base available. For applying these models, the study should include the entire
watershed (and, in some cases, the airshed as well) and not just the lake water body.
No general recommendation can be given to resolve the dilemma between the necessity
of adequate planning data, and the need to implement obvious measures without delay.
Although numerous restoration measures around the world have proved to be ineffective
due to insufficient diagnosis and evaluation by scientists and managers, most of these
were measures addressing ecological balances within the water body (see section 8.5).
In contrast, measures addressing reduction of external nutrient inputs are not likely to be
applied mistakenly. In the worst case they may prove to be insufficient and require
further action - either further reduction of inputs, or in-lake action.
An effective alternative to quantitative assessment of loading, is a "common-sense" or
qualitative approach. This begins with studying maps and geographical information to
identify main tributaries, slopes critical for erosion, precipitation patterns and land use.
Detailed and critical inspection of the catchment area may provide an excellent basis for
recognising priority actions, some of which may be implemented at low cost. Such
inspection is generally of underestimated value. Qualitative assessments should include
identification of sewage outfalls (possibly illegal or unregistered), land use, vegetation
cover, agricultural practices (e.g. soil tilling supportive of erosion, lack of protective
riparian buffer strips with dense vegetation cover as a barrier between surface runoff and
water body, and stubble burning).
Box 8.3 Testing the Catchment Management Support System (CMSS) in the Murrumbidgee
River Catchment, New South Wales, Australia
The Catchment Management Support System (CMSS) is a simple computerised decision support
system developed by CSIRO Land and Water, Australia. It combines land use, nutrient
generation and land management information into a single model which can predict the impacts
and costs of different land management practices in a catchment. As the set-up and use of CMSS
does not require a technical or computing background, it is highly suited to use by catchment
management committees and other community or management groups (Davis and Farley, 1997).
In a recent application (Cuddy et al., 1997), CMSS was developed for the Murrumbidgee River
Catchment, New South Wales (NSW) with the intention that it should be provided to local
catchment committees as a tool in the development of nutrient management plans. This pilot
study was used to demonstrate the application of CMSS to a specific area, as an initial phase of
its application to major catchments in NSW. In applying CMSS to the Murrumbidgee Catchment,
significant inputs were required from relevant management organisations and individuals. The
necessary data, ranging from soil types and rainfall distribution to the initial and ongoing costs of
changed sewage treatment practices, were available from these organisations. The
Murrumbidgee CMSS was developed within the timeframe of the pilot study and handed over to
the local agencies. Although the pilot study successfully met its objectives and the program has
now been widely adopted, CMSS has yet to be influential in the production of nutrient
management plans. This reflects both the prolonged nature of developing plans through
community consultation and the lack of involvement by local catchment committee members in
the pilot study.
While investments in internal or "in-lake" control measures can be wasted without
sufficient pre-restoration evaluation, reduction of external nutrient inputs will be at least a
first step in the right direction. Managers are encouraged to implement nutrient control
measures, even if the data base is not sufficient to predict the quantitative impact on
concentrations within the water body.
8.4.1 Domestic wastewater
Wastewater emissions have frequently been managed by a philosophy of using water as
a medium for transporting wastes out of the locality without considering the impairment
of the function of the water as a resource further downstream, or of the possible
enrichment of lakes with pollutants and nutrients.
Many developing and least developed countries are extending their coverage of drinking
water supplies in order to improve human health. Evaluation of experience shows that
this usually leads to a several-fold per capita increase in water consumption and thus
also in the amount of waste-water generated. Improvement of human health therefore
also requires development of wastewater collection and treatment, as highlighted by the
World Bank:
"For urban water supply, experience indicates that the collection and proper treatment of
sewage must be an integral part of water supply projects. Bringing water into a city
without taking sewage out exposes the population - and particularly the poor -to
increased pollution." (World Bank, 1993)
Possible exposure to pathogens is a major reason why collection and treatment of
wastewater is important. Another reason is that cyanobacteria proliferate in eutrophic
lakes and rivers fertilised by wastewaters.
Replacement of phosphorus in laundry detergents can typically reduce phosphate loads
in sewage by 50 per cent at best, the remaining 50 per cent being inevitable because it
originates from human excreta. Wherever sewage outfalls are considered to be a
significant input of phosphorus to a water resource, phosphate elimination, alternative
treatment approaches (see Box 8.4), or sewage diversion is necessary. Criteria for
adequate technology largely depend upon population structure and on geographic
conditions.
If population density is low, and the flushing rates of water bodies or phosphorus
absorption capacity of the soils is high, nutrient elimination from sewage may not be
necessary - high nutrient concentrations in water resources in such situations are more
likely to originate from agriculture. Treatment methods adequate for protection from
infectious agents may also be sufficient in these circumstances (on-site treatment such
as properly constructed latrines, septic tanks and sewage lagoons). If domestic waste-
water is used in agriculture, health risks should be avoided by following the WHO
guidelines for the use of wastewater in agriculture and aquaculture (Mara and
Cairncross, 1989). A special aspect of such situations is tourism. Low population areas
affected by tourism may need special consideration because the population may
increase temporarily several-fold and overload sewage treatment capacities. In
temperate regions, the tourism season may coincide with the cyanobacterial growth
season.
Box 8.4 Nutrient retention using low- and medium-technology approaches
Alternatives to "high-tech" nutrient stripping methods in sewage treatment (involving an array of
methods using lagoons or land treatment) have been in use for more than a century, and their
advantages as well as their drawbacks are well established. Many land treatment systems require
large areas (up to 10 m2 per population equivalent), and infiltration of wastewater into the ground
below has often occurred without control for hazardous substances or pathogens. Modern
artificial wetland systems are being developed to overcome these shortcomings. These systems
combine mineralisation processes in the water body with filtration through the soil substrate; they
are sealed towards the bottom and they have controlled effluents. As with "high-tech" treatment
plants, artificial wetland systems require careful maintenance operation, and control. They are by
no means a solution for "letting nature do the job alone". Poor maintenance and overloading
rapidly lead to malfunctioning and to poor hygienic conditions in the system. In temperate regions,
performance during the cold season may be less effective, but as a means for handling additional
sewage loads caused by tourism during the warm season, such systems may be excellent
supplements to year-round treatment technologies. Other approaches comprise hygienic
methods of collection of excreta, re-use of waste in agriculture and regular emptying of septic
tanks. Care must be taken particularly with respect to occupational hazards, and with the
designing and siting of alternative treatment methods in order to avoid relocation of the
wastewater problem to another site (e.g. causing groundwater contamination).
Sparsely populated regions with water bodies highly susceptible to eutrophication, e.g.
because of long water retention times (such as many lakes in Sweden), will require more
carefully designed sanitation systems to protect these resources. Supplementary
treatment techniques may be necessary, particularly during the tourist season (see Box
8.5).
In many densely populated areas, municipal sewage is the source of at least half of the
total phosphorus inputs to rivers and lakes. In large urban areas, treatment of
wastewater collected in sewerage systems requires industrial-scale plants for the
protection of surface waters. Untreated municipal sewage contains more than 10 mg 1-1
of phosphorus. Biological (secondary) treatment oxidises organic matter, but does not
substantially reduce phosphorus content. Where municipal sewage constitutes a
significant source of phosphorus pollution, removal of phosphorus at treatment plants is
necessary (see Box 8.5). Heavy seasonal tourism may also be a problem in such
situations because it increases the demand on the capacity of treatment plants and
sewerage and also causes substantial fluctuations in the sewage load. Sewerage and
treatment for fluctuating amounts of sewage present specific technical difficulties. Lake
Balaton is an example of such a situation, where the number of tourists during July and
August is twice that of the local population (Somlyody and van Straten, 1986).
Box 8.5 Two well-established and widely used technologies for phosphorus removal in
treatment plants
Chemical precipitation with ferric or aluminium salts, often performed simultaneously with
biological treatment, can reduce phosphorus concentrations by an order of magnitude to values
around 1 mg I-1.
Biological phosphorus removal ("bio-P") can be achieved by alternating aerobic and anaerobic
steps in biological treatment and thus substantially enhancing P-uptake by bacteria. This method
saves flocculation chemicals and produces less sludge, but requires an adequate design of
basins and careful operation of the process. In large treatment plants (> 100, 000 population
equivalents) it is more economic than chemical flocculation, because operation costs are lower
(Gleisberg et al., 1995). It can reduce treatment plant effluent concentrations down to 0.2-0.5 mg
l-1 P. Although the method has been known for several decades, experience has only recently
accumulated to a level of understanding which allows stable and reliable performance, and it is
advised to maintain chemical precipitation facilities as a back-up (Harremoes, 1997), especially
for treatment plants discharging into water bodies with critical phosphorus concentrations.
In lowland regions, discharge of domestic and industrial wastewater may amount to 50
per cent and in dry seasons to almost 100 per cent of the total flow of the recipient river,
e.g. River Thames in London (Gray, 1994) and Havel River in Berlin (Köhler and Klein,
1997). Such slow flowing rivers are suitable habitats for cyanobacterial growth but the
river water may also be needed for production of drinking water. In such situations,
phosphorus elimination by simultaneous chemical precipitation or "bio-P" is not
adequate, because concentrations in the recipient water body will almost equal the
outfall concentrations. Treatment objectives therefore are 0.03-0.05 mg l-1 P and this can
be attained by adding a further treatment step (filtration) for removal of phosphorus in
small, slowly settling floes. The removal of pathogens is usually also a further important
objective of filtration treatment in regions with such intensive water use. Various
methods of filtration over sand or gravel and pumice beds are available, and new
methods of membrane filtration are also being developed.
The costs of such treatment technology may appear intimidating at first glance because
of the necessary investments. However, even sophisticated procedures involving
filtration need not cost more than US$ 0.15-0.30 per m3 of treated water (Heinzmann and
Chorus, 1994), and this is usually only a small fraction of the costs of drinking water.
Effective resource protection in such densely populated areas will save the cost of
drinking water treatment, for example by saving the necessity of activated carbon
filtration.
Eutrophication due to sewage outfalls has been recognised as a widespread problem
since the 1970s. Abatement was begun in that decade with several isolated projects,
such as diversion of sewage around lakes with specific touristic value (e.g. at Lake
Constance in the 1970s and at major parts of Lake Balaton in the 1980s) and the
introduction of phosphorus precipitation in a few treatment plants. Comprehensive
programmes began in the mid 1980s. In Europe, an international convention for the
protection of the North Sea triggered introduction of phosphorus and nitrogen elimination
in larger sewage treatment plants (those treating more than 10,000 population
equivalents). Recently, the implementation of measures to eliminate nutrients in sewage
has started to show substantial success:
• Denmark achieved a 79 per cent reduction of phosphorus inputs from sewage between
1985 and 1995 and further reduction is expected in 1997 when two plants in
Copenhagen go into full operation (Harremoes, 1997).
• Switzerland achieved a 60 per cent decline in total phosphorus inputs from municipal
wastewater (Siegrist and Boiler, 1996).
• The USA and Canada together achieved a 50 per cent reduction in phosphorus
concentrations in Lake Ontario and the west basin of Lake Erie, with significant impact
upon "algal blooms" and accumulations of filamentous cyanobacteria on shorelines, by
the construction and upgrading of sewage treatment plants along the Great Lakes
(Charlton, 1997). However, in order to maintain the quality now achieved despite the
expected increase of population density by the year 2011, and in order to meet the
quality targets for Hamilton Harbour, tertiary sewage treatment (effluent filtration) is
considered necessary.
Charlton (1997) emphasises the importance of reliable performance of sewage
treatment plants: "Part of the difficulty in understanding sewage problems is the
mistaken belief that sewage treatment plants, once built, will perform as planned, with no
operational problems" (Charlton, 1997). Steady degradation of performance during
critical summer months has led to considerable phosphorus inputs, the highest being 2.7
times the target. Internal assessment, optimisation of performance, and identification of
staff with the job and the achievement of effluent target concentrations, are crucial for
reducing effluent loads.
8.4.2 Agriculture and erosion
Losses of phosphorus and nitrogen from deforested, agriculturally-used areas into
surface waters are the other major factor enhancing eutrophication. As with phosphorus
pollution from wastewater, this problem has increased exponentially in some parts of the
world since the 1950s. The causes are structural changes in agriculture involving
intensification by tillage of larger plots, extensive application of mineral fertilisers, and
the establishment of large-scale animal husbandry. Simultaneously, other major parts of
the world suffer substantial lack of phosphorus in topsoils. Zehnder (1996) points out a
striking global imbalance between surplus phosphorus in most of the industrialised
regions and a lack of phosphorus in most developing regions. On a global scale,
phosphorus must be perceived as a limited resource. In regions with phosphorus
deficiency, controlled fertilisation in combination with adequate protection from erosion,
would help maintain fertility of tropical and subtropical soils, so that further deforestation
would no longer be necessary in order to gain new (only transiently fertile) farmland.
Further, development of sewage treatment methods that allow reclamation of
phosphorus for reuse as fertiliser should be a long-term target for sustainable handling
of this resource.
Excessive use of fertilisers and manure has created eutrophication problems in lakes
and rivers. In regions with intensive agriculture and slowly flowing rivers with little
discharge, e.g. in much of north-western Europe, water bodies without cyanobacterial
problems have become scarce. Heavy surplus fertilisation has been enhanced by the
widespread trust in phosphorus retention in soils (soils as "savings banks" for
phosphorus), but soil erosion and surface runoff have proved to be major pathways into
surface waters, particularly through storms and intensive rainfall shortly after application
of fertiliser or manure. The extent of these losses is site-specific and largely depends
upon geographic and hydrological conditions: "It has been suggested that up to 90 per
cent of the annual phosphorus losses occur from only 5 per cent of the land during only
one or two storms, especially in areas where surface runoff and erosion are the
dominant routes for phosphorus losses" (Oenema and Roest, 1997). The importance of
leaching, first recognised as a pathway for nitrate inputs, is being recognised
increasingly for phosphate in some types of soils, e.g. sandy, acidic soils with a high
degree of saturation of their phosphorus adsorption capacity (Oenema and Roest, 1997).
For the Netherlands, Oenema and Roest (1977) estimate 300,000-400,000 ha of
phosphorus-leaking sandy soils to be pollution "hot spots" requiring high priority in
identification and remediation.
In tropical and subtropical regions, eutrophication of lakes and reservoirs due to inputs
associated with erosion is greatly enhanced.
Closing cycles by reuse of manure as a nutrient resource in agriculture, especially if
combined with changing practices of land tillage and deforestation, can contribute to
reduction of nutrient pollution. Such approaches are sustainable alternatives to
considering animal slurry as waste, and reduce the costs of purchase of fertilisers. In this
context, performance of large-scale livestock farming in industrial dimensions requires
regulation just as for industry:
"The output of waste from many cattle and pig units measures up to that of a large town
and needs to be managed with at least the same care as that accorded to human waste.
At one time the only environmental requirement placed on farmers was that they should
observe good agricultural practice. This is no longer a satisfactory basis for
environmental protection. Agriculture must be put on the same basis as other major
industries with strict controls on the quality and quantity of effluent discharges."
(Packham, 1994)
Box 8.6 Good agricultural practices - best management practices
For fertilisation
• Planning land use, choice of crops and crop rotation to minimise erosion losses.
• Structuring the farmland to minimise erosion by measures such as terracing, interruption of
large areas with shrub hedges, and buffer strips planted with shrubs along river banks and lake
shores.
• Planning nutrient management in order to avoid losses from the farm by closing nutrient cycles,
using manure as fertiliser and avoiding phosphorus import.
• Measuring current fertiliser content of soils and dosing according to the demand calculated for
the crop.
• Timing application of fertilisers according to the growth of the crop.
• Cover crops to reduce erosion from bare soil.
• Managing irrigation and groundwater levels.
• Using animal slurry as fertiliser according to the demand of the crop, rather than misusing crops
or grasslands as a deposit site for animal slurry.
For animal husbandry
• Reduction of livestock density to 1.5-2 cattle units per hectare.
• Closing nutrient cycles by limiting stock numbers to the fertilisation requirements of the area
used for growing crops.
• Placing feedlots and watering sites away from surface waters.
• Protecting river banks and lake shores with fences to keep out livestock in order to reduce both
direct pollution by excreta and increased erosion by treading.
The alternative to Packham's request is to redefine "good agricultural practice" to include
sustainable resource use. Criteria for "best management practices" or "good agricultural
practices" are listed in Box 8.6.
Apart from closing nutrient cycles, sustainable biological methods of production have
been developed in many pilot projects and are becoming increasingly popular. Model
projects have demonstrated that productivity of biological or "organic" farming methods
is not substantially lower than that of conventional farming, provided methods are
adapted adequately to the given geographic conditions. The economic balance of
"biological" or "organic" farms is frequently equally good because of reduced
expenditure for agrochemicals and, in some cases, better prices for the product. Co-
operation between water supply agencies and farmers has supported this development
in Germany (see Box 8.7) and has shown success in improving resource quality.
In drinking water catchments, it is particularly important that agriculture follows "best
agricultural practices". This can be encouraged by designating protection zones around
the drinking water source and regulating practices allowed or prohibited within these
protection zones. Sophisticated models distinguish two to three degrees of protection,
depending upon the relative impact of the respective part of the catchment upon the
water quality. In addition to agriculture, other activities which impact water quality, such
as forestry, fisheries and tourism, may be regulated in drinking water protection zones.
Countries with a traditional rural society may have options for reclaiming historical
agricultural experience and combining it with modern approaches to sustainable "best
agricultural practice" in order to attain high outputs of high quality products at low
environmental and health impact. Such an integrated approach requires continuous
development, evaluation of experience and training.
Countries with large-scale industrialised agriculture may have problems in implementing
change. In contrast to the success achieved in phosphorus elimination by wastewater
treatment, progress in abatement of agricultural phosphorus pollution has at best been
modest. For Switzerland, Wehrli et al. (1996) estimate that, while phosphorus emissions
from sewage have been reduced by 60 per cent during the past 15 years, losses from
agricultural areas into water bodies have rather increased and the need for a new
agricultural policy is just beginning to be widely perceived. Some of the reasons for this
delay in awareness and action are:
• Losses of phosphorus from farmland are rarely perceived as economic losses.
• Effective measures will differ regionally or even from farm to farm, and management
practices must be optimised locally rather than administered generally. This requires
shifts of attitudes.
• Even where programmes and regulations exist, their implementation and control may
be difficult.
A basic change in attitude is required. In some countries this appears to be developing
slowly as a new generation of farmers with better training (including education on
sustainable farm management and ecological impacts) takes over, and as consumer
awareness for quality criteria and the ecological impact of products is growing. A wide
array of measures can be used by government authorities to support such developments.
Examples are training and advice to farmers, eco-audits on products, subsidies for
setting land aside from use, subsidies or tax redemptions during periods of transition to
organic farming methods, pollution taxes and legislation to enforce water protection.
Box 8.7 Co-operation between water suppliers and agriculture for sustainable provision of
healthy drinking water
Legislation should include the principle that use of land and water must occur in such a
sustainable way that subsequent use by others Is not hampered. This provides a legal basis for
requiring co-operation of agriculture with water supply agencies. Furthermore, protection zones
above aquifers or around reservoirs must be staked out so that they cover the actual "intake" of
the respective resource. Where protection zones already exist, new hydrological understanding
often shows that in many cases these areas are much larger than previously presumed, and that
protection zones must be expanded.
Such areas or zones are especially suitable for developing models of co-operation. One such
model is the foundation of a voluntary association of those concerned, namely farmers, water and
health administrations, representatives of agricultural associations and, amongst others, the
water supply organisation. A steering committee or executive board should be elected, in which
the water supply organisation should not take the lead. The guiding principle is "co-operation
instead of confrontation". An alternative may be to have direct contracts between the farmers and
the water supply agency. Such contracts bind the farmers to certain methods of production in
return for some financial support, especially during the years of transition from intensive farming
to sustainable methods. Tasks for such associations and their leadership are:
• Issuing regular advice, e.g. for suitable situations for applying manure, fertiliser or well-targeted
pesticides, and issuing prohibited periods (e.g. "no liquid manure on frozen ground"), or
computer-supported fertilisation schedules.
• Regulating the maximum density of livestock tolerable without risking pollution of the aquifer.
• Organising advice and training for farmers, e.g. for measuring soil content of fertilisers.
• Establishing time schedules for changes in land use (e.g. four years transition time for
extensivation, eight years of use as pasture, but then use only for forestry). Often, lenient time
schedules will be fulfilled much more quickly than required.
• Provide seeds for intercropping or keeping the ground covered to protect against erosion.
• Purchase suitable machines for demonstration or for communal use.
The general emphasis is on advice; on using, developing, publishing and making available local
experience and expertise; and on expressing concern and requesting responsible co-operation
rather than on issuing prohibitions. A very successful tool has been the installation of counsellors
for sustainable farming whose salaries are paid by the water supply agency, but who work within
the agricultural authorities and organise courses as well as giving individual advice and training.
The economic aim is to market products which have been audited in relation to health and
sustainable land use. Farmers can join an organisation for organic production methods and sell
their products under the name of the association; this should be encouraged by the association.
Such organisations then take over the responsibility for checking that members comply with the
rules and the methods of production; this helps to enforce sustainable production methods. Such
organisations can be encouraged to advertise for membership in the region.
The costs of such models of co-operation vary considerably, depending on whether farmers must
be supported during phases of transition and on the services provided. Nevertheless, experience
shows that these measures increase the price of water only by a few cents per cubic metre
(Such, 1996).
Establishing such co-operations is easiest if the land in the protection zone belongs to the water
supply company or agency and is only leased to the farmers. Furthermore, employing an expert
on agriculture may help a water supply agency considerably in negotiating with farmers. Success
with this approach has been reported by Such (1996), Höllein (1996) and Fleischer (1996).
8.4.3 Treatment of drinking water reservoir inlets
Where drinking water reservoirs with one major inflow have a large share of diffuse, non-
point source inputs and a strong need for rapid remediation, reduction of nutrients in the
inflow may be the most effective option. Pre-reservoirs with retention times of at least
several days can reduce total phosphorus inputs by 50-65 per cent (Klapper, 1992).
Retention times should allow incorporation of phosphorus into algal biomass and
sedimentation of that biomass, but should not be large enough for slow growing taxa,
such as cyanobacteria, to establish dominance. Sediment dredging may be necessary at
intervals of several years in order to counteract the re-release of phosphorus.
The Kis-Balaton reservoir in Hungary is an example of a special wetland and shallow
reservoir system of 60 km2 designed to retain phosphorus and reduce inputs to the
tenfold larger Lake Balaton. Water is retained for one month (mean value) in an intricate
system between coffer dams and reed zones. Phosphorus retention has been
successful, but flooding with stormwater from the Zala River has caused pulsed
phosphorus inputs to the lake (Padisák, Pers. Comm.).
If the largest nutrient share originates from a single major inflow, phosphorus stripping
facilities can be very effective in reducing inputs. Successful examples, with different
degrees of technological sophistication, are the Wahnbach Reservoir, Lake
Schlachtensee, Lake Tegel (Sas, 1989), and the Haltern Reservoir (Paetsch and Kötter,
1980).
8.5 Internal measures for nutrient and cyanobacterial control
In planning restoration measures for lakes and reservoirs, it is important to realise that
substantial time lags may occur between measures to reduce external inputs and the
results achieved in the water body. Feedback mechanisms within the ecosystem (e.g.
sediment-water interactions or the establishment of new dominant species) require time
to reach a new equilibrium. Hypertrophic aquatic ecosystems have specific positive
feedback mechanisms which stabilise trophic state and cyanobacterial dominance and
therefore resilience effects are not uncommon, even after substantial reduction of inputs
below thresholds calculated to be effective. Sas (1989) pointed out that resilience
patterns occur on two levels:
• Delayed response of in-lake total phosphorus concentrations to a reduction of input,
due to the time required for flushing phosphorus out of the water body, and the time
required for establishment of new sediment-water equilibria.
• Delayed response of phytoplankton biomass and species composition to reductions of
in-lake total phosphorus concentrations, due to stability of prevailing biocoenosis
structures and/or biotic enhancement of internal load.
Experience shows that several years (up to 10) may be necessary between the
implementation of a restoration measure that substantially decreases inputs, and visible
success in terms of reduction of phytoplankton biomass and cyanobacterial blooms.
Monitoring of phosphorus inputs and phosphorus concentrations in the recipient water
body during this time is recommended. Usually, a declining trend in total phosphorus
concentration will be the first detectable response to a reduction in inputs and will
indicate whether a particular measure can be expected to be successful, but it may take
years for phosphorus concentrations to decline below the threshold effective for
controlling phytoplankton biomass. Often, such time lags are due to the (sometimes
substantial) phosphate storage capacity of anoxic sediments typical in hypertrophic
waters. Flushing rates (i.e. the inverse of retention times) strongly influence the time
necessary to reach a new equilibrium. In some cases, particularly in water bodies with
low water exchange rates, supplementary "internal" measures may be advisable in order
to accelerate a response. The following sections briefly introduce and evaluate a number
of such measures for which experience is available.
With very few exceptions, internal measures are appropriate only after, or in combination
with, an effective reduction of external inputs. In principle, reduction of inputs should be
the actual restoration or resource protection measure, and internal measures should
serve as a further boost to switch the ecosystem out of resilience and into a new balance.
If possible, a few years of patience and observation of nutrient concentration trends
within the lake will show whether internal measures are necessary. Only rarely are
internal measures without adequate reductions of inputs justified as an emergency
approach; usually such measures require continuous operation (such as aeration, see
section 8.5.2) or repeated application (such as in-lake phosphate precipitation, see
section 8.5.1). Medium- to long-term success of restoration investments is at stake if this
principle is not considered.
8.5.1 In-lake phosphorus precipitation
In lakes and reservoirs with high water retention times, decline of phosphorus
concentrations may be very slow, even after external inputs have been reduced to levels
which should ensure a mesotrophic or oligotrophic state. If the water body has a high
phosphorus content that is flushed out only slowly, only some of the phosphorus within
the biomass will settle to the sediments. Much of it is released from decaying organic
material, entrained back into the water body by water circulation, taken up by
cyanobacteria or algae and, in part, passed on to higher levels of the food web.
Degradation of organic material at the sediment surface has often led to anoxic
conditions which may accelerate phosphorus release rates dramatically. Thus,
phosphorus within a lake can be recycled many times, and no decline of cyanobacterial
biomass can be achieved without reducing this in-lake phosphorus pool. Sometimes, this
situation also applies to lakes which are naturally eutrophic, such as lakes in western
Canada situated on phosphorus-rich glacial till (Prepas et al., 1997). Precipitation of
phosphorus from the water body to the sediment can be a successful measure, if it is
undertaken so that phosphorus remains permanently bound in the sediment.
Prerequisites for lasting success are low external loading, sufficient depth to prevent
sediment resuspension due to wind events, and adequate choice of flocculants.
Experiments with precipitation of phosphorus have been undertaken with aluminium
sulphate, ferric salts (chlorides, sulphates), ferric aluminium sulphate, clay particles and
lime (as Ca(OH) and as CaCO ).
2 3
Ferric salts are effective in precipitating phosphorus, but difficult to handle because of
their aggressive acidity. Furthermore, the iron-phosphorus complex is stable only under
oxic conditions. Thus application of ferric salts usually requires subsequent continuous
aeration to avoid re-dissolution of phosphorus under anoxic conditions. Due to the high
mobility of iron ions, addition of iron frequently often has to be repeated at regular
intervals. In addition, Prepas et al. (1997) point out that iron may be a limiting micro-
nutrient in some systems and, in such situations, treatment with ferric salts may actually
stimulate growth of cyanobacteria and algae.
Aluminium sulphate is poorly soluble under neutral and high pH conditions, but may
decrease pH in waters with low buffering capacity, which leads to solubilisation and
problems of alum toxicity.
Lime (both Ca(OH) and CaCO ) has been used as an algicide to coagulate and
2 3
precipitate phytoplankton cells out of the water column (Murphy et al., 1990; Zhang and
Prepas, 1996). It is non-toxic, usually fairly inexpensive, and the pH-shock for the
aquatic biota can be minimised by careful dosing over an extended time span. Unlike
treatment with copper sulphate, the precipitation of cyanobacterial cells with Ca(OH)
2
does not appear to cause cell lysis and toxin release into the water (Kenefick et al., 1993;
Lam et al., 1995). Lime also functions, to some extent, as a longer-term algal inhibitor,
reducing eutrophication by precipitating phosphorus from the water (Murphy et al., 1990).
It appears that Ca(OH) is more effective than CaCO in precipitating phosphorus
2 3
(Murphy et al., 1990). Many of the studies of both the mechanism and effects of liming
for algal control have been carried out in eutrophic, hard water lakes or farm dugouts
(dams) in Alberta, Canada (Murphy et al., 1990; Zhang and Prepas, 1996). It is possible
that the technique may be more effective in these conditions than in soft water. The dose
rates used are also quite high (e.g. 50-250 mg l-1 Ca(OH) ) (Zhang and Prepas, 1996)
2
which would make the technique prohibitive for large lakes. Techniques for the
application of lime, which involve pumping or spraying of a slurry, are described by
Prepas et al. (1990b).
Experience with in-lake precipitation of phosphorus is increasingly being compiled. A
number of documented case studies show success either in terms of reducing
phytoplankton biomass or in terms of shifting species dominance away from
cyanobacteria. Nevertheless, numerous unsuccessful cases have also been
documented, and further development of these techniques is ongoing (see compilation
in Klapper (1992) and in Cooke et al. (1981, 1993)). Furthermore, in some water bodies,
the concentrations of iron or calcium compounds in the inflow are naturally high and
regularly provide sufficient binding sites for phosphate to induce natural phosphorus
precipitation. Measures in the catchment area or changes in inflow regime may have
considerable impact in either increasing or decreasing this input, and thus may have a
significant impact on the trophic state of the water body.
8.5.2 Sediment dredging and phosphorus binding
Release from sediments may be a substantial source of phosphorus (sometimes
referred to as internal loading) for many years after external inputs have been minimised.
Water exchange rates, sediment chemistry, temperatures, mixing conditions, and
bioturbation govern phosphorus release rates. Iron-bound phosphorus is highly sensitive
to redox conditions; when sediment surfaces turn anoxic during summer stratification,
phosphorus concentrations may increase dramatically, fertilising cyanobacteria in their
optimum growing season. Under oxic conditions in shallow, unstratified systems, high
pH (> 9.8) may strongly enhance oxic phosphorus release (Ryding, 1979). Because high
pH values are a result of intensive photosynthetic activity, this phosphorus release
pathway is a positive feedback mechanism in favour of cyanobacterial blooms. Other
aerobic phosphorus release mechanisms may also be significant, especially bioturbation
by feeding fish and invertebrates (Gardner et al., 1981).
Options for measures to counteract sediment release are removal of sediment (dredging)
or treatment to bind phosphorus. Dredging is costly and will reduce release rates only if:
• It is carried out down to sediment layers with a lower or less mobile phosphorus
content.
• Phosphorus-rich interstitial water is handled in such a fashion that it does not reach the
water body and cause additional inputs.
• Dredged sludge can be deposited where it does not create a new external input with
erosion and stormwater runoff into the lake.
In some urban and industrial regions, dredging is precluded or complicated by high
concentrations of heavy metals and organic contaminants in the sediments which would
then require disposal as hazardous waste. Dredging is particularly recommended for
smaller water bodies where the trophic state can be further improved by gaining depth,
or which also need to be cleared of dumped rubbish.
Sediment treatments aim at trapping phosphorus in the sediment, either by oxidation to
insoluble iron compounds, or by adsorption onto calcium carbonate or clay particles.
During the past two decades, broad experience collected with numerous failures (see
Box 8.8) and a few successful cases has shown that effective treatment requires careful
design on the basis of profound understanding of the sediment chemistry and hydrology
of the water body to be treated. Oxidisation may be achieved by aeration, artificial mixing
(see also section 8.5.5), or the introduction of pure oxygen. It appears to be most
effective if achieved with nitrate, which transports more oxygen and penetrates more
readily into sediments. Well-treated sewage effluent (not contaminated with harmful
substances, fully nitrified and after phosphorus removal) may be suitable for this purpose,
if the process is controlled so that nitrate concentrations are not elevated in drinking
water.
Box 8.8 Is aeration effective in binding phosphate in sediments?
The frequent failures in the use of aeration to meet the objective of reducing phosphorus efflux
from sediments require critical highlighting. Many aeration projects had several objectives, often
not carefully distinguished and planned, such as (i) providing sufficiently high oxygen
concentrations for survival offish and fish eggs in deep waters and on the sediment surface, (ii)
destratification in order to entrain buoyant cyanobacteria, and (iii) oxidising sediment surfaces.
Some of these objectives may be conflicting, e.g. destratification will increase sediment surface
temperatures, thus potentially enhancing phosphorus release, and it will transport nutrient-rich,
near-surface water into upper strata where these nutrients can be used for growth of
cyanobacteria or other phytoplankton. Often, aeration has proved to be insufficient for achieving
the aim of reducing phosphorus release. Even the prominent, carefully designed, experiment at
the Swiss Baldegger See did not succeed in increasing phosphorus retention of the sediments
after 10 years of operation (Wuest and Wehrli, 1996). Energy costs of aeration may be
considerable. At the present state of the art, it can be recommended only for increasing the
oxygen content of the water (e.g. as a fish habitat), or if artificial mixing is desired - success in
increasing phosphorus retention in lake sediments appears doubtful. Injection of pure oxygen
appears to be more successful in some cases (Gemza, 1997; Prepas et al., 1997).
8.5.3 Withdrawal of bottom water from the hypolimnion
In thermally stratified eutrophic lakes, phosphorus accumulates in the hypolimnion (cold
bottom water layer) during summer stagnation, partly from settled organic material
originating in the upper water layers and, in many lakes, largely from the release of
sediment-bound phosphorus under anoxic conditions. Although most natural outflows
drain surface water, it is often possible to dam the natural outflow and to abstract
hypolimnetic water instead (Olzewski, 1961). This is especially easy to apply to
reservoirs and can reduce in-lake concentrations significantly. In the Swiss Mauensee
the biomass of Planktothrix rubescens was reduced from 152 g m-3 to 42 g m-3 using this
approach (Gächter, 1976).
Nürnberg (1997) compiled the advantages of hypolimnetic withdrawal during summer
stratification as a method based solely on selective output of total-P rich water. The
advantages of the method are:
• It addresses the cause of eutrophication.
• It does not add chemicals.
• It does not necessarily change the water budget.
• It can break the cycle of enhanced sediment accumulation of total phosphorus.
• It can flush more phosphorus out of the system than the sediments accumulate each
year.
Hypolimnetic withdrawal is effective only if enough water flows into the lake. Furthermore,
some lowering of the water level may be tolerable, but complete destratification by
removal of most of the hypolimnion should be avoided, because increasing the contact
area between warm surface water and sediments will enhance phosphorus release due
to elevated temperatures. In addition, impairment of water quality downstream will
require attention if the amount of phosphorus released is high in relation to the total flow.
Downstream phosphorus pollution may be avoided by treatment of the hypolimnion
outlet with chemical phosphorus precipitation. Nevertheless, the low temperatures of the
hypolimnion water may have a substantial impact on downstream biological processes,
such as fish breeding.
8.5.4 Reduction by flushing
Flushing with water of low phosphorus concentrations can greatly reduce external inputs
and will also accelerate recovery from internal loading by removing in-lake phosphorus
which would otherwise be recycled for a number of growing seasons. If suitable water is
available in sufficient quantity, flushing can be a very effective tool for reduction of
cyanobacterial proliferation. Successful examples are Veluwemeer in the Netherlands
(Sas, 1989) and Moses Lake in the USA (Welch et al., 1972). However, this measure
also implies a relocation of the phosphorus to another water body, and this impact must
also be evaluated.
8.5.5 Hydrophysical measures
Cyanobacteria show different "strategies" of survival in competition against other
phytoplankton organisms (section 2.3). Many of these strategies are adapted to specific
hydrophysical conditions. Changing these conditions may therefore substantially reduce
the success of these cyanobacterial "ecostrategists" and allow other phytoplankton
species to become dominant. This approach can be an effective temporary,
supplementary measure alongside reduction of external inputs of nutrients, particularly if
in-lake nutrient concentrations have declined to values around the threshold where
success may be expected. In some cases, where eutrophication levels cannot be
decreased, permanent installation of hydrophysical measures can be a solution (see
Visser et al. (1996) for the example of Nieuwe Meer in Amsterdam).
The mass development of scum-forming species is highly dependant on the stability of
the water column. In water without vertical mixing, the colonies of Microcystis or other
colony-forming taxa can migrate up and down by changing their specific weight (see
section 2.3). Interrupting this vertical migration of the colonies by artificial mixing of an
otherwise stably stratified water body, can prevent rapid development of surface scums.
Furthermore, disrupting the possibility for these organisms to move into strata with
optimum light conditions is likely to reduce their growth rate and thus their efficiency in
competing against other phytoplankton. In contrast, mixing improves growth conditions
for taxa such as diatoms, which depend on mixing to remain in suspension. Thus,
increased mixing may shift species composition from cyanobacteria to, for example,
diatoms.
Thermally stratified water bodies naturally have an upper mixed layer known as the
epilimnion. If artificial mixing substantially increases the depth of this layer, it reduces the
light-determined carrying capacity, or the concentration of phytoplankton biomass
possible (see also section 8.1). To be successful, artificial mixing measures must satisfy
three conditions (see Visser et al., 1996):
• At least 80 per cent of the water volume should be mixed.
• The artificial mixing rate must be higher than the rate of vertical movement of the
colonies of cyanobacteria. Rates of colony movement depend on colony size and thus
are somewhat variable (see section 2.3), but as a general rule, a mixing rate of 1 m h-1 is
sufficient to prevent cyanobacterial blooms.
• A large part of the water body must be sufficiently deep. In most cases artificial mixing
has been caused by installing aeration tubes which are connected to a compressor on
the shore. The aeration tubes are situated in the deeper regions of the water body.
Waters with extensive shallow areas have a low circulation rate which can negatively
influence the results of artificial mixing. Furthermore, if the water body is too shallow,
mixing cannot reduce the light-determined carrying capacity strongly enough to prevent
cyanobacterial growth. The example of Nieuwe Meer (Visser et al., 1996) shows that
more than 20 m depth may be required.
A number of mixing projects have been unsuccessful because these principles were
neglected. Many systems are now on the market, provided by different engineering
companies. Engineering expertise is sufficiently developed to design systems that can
meet the hydrophysical requirements. Care must be taken, however, to select competent
companies, and to plan the measure to meet the ecological targets set in combating
cyanobacterial blooms. Furthermore, in tropical and subtropical countries with high and
prolonged insulation, the costs of systems are enough for mixing to become prohibitive.
8.5.6 Biomanipulation
Biomanipulation includes a range of techniques that influence algal growth by
manipulation of parts of the food web of a lake. Examples are removal of planktivorous
and benthivorous fish populations, providing refuges for zooplankton and introducing
predatory fish such as pike (Esox lucius) in order to decimate planktivorous fish
populations, and introducing submerged aquatic plants to compete with phytoplankton in
consuming nutrients (Kitchell, 1992). These techniques aim at stimulating the growth or
presence of phytoplankton-grazing organisms or of phytoplankton competitors.
Increasing grazing pressure
In shallow lakes, the removal of a large proportion of benthic and planktivorous fish can
be helpful to diminish algal growth. Without this predation pressure, zooplankton and
benthic fauna can develop and feed on algae and some species of cyanobacteria (e.g.
early stages of Microcystis population growth when colonies are still very small).
Selective removal of benthic fish reduces resuspension of sediments and thus
mobilisation rates of sediment phosphorus (in deep lakes this is difficult). To stimulate
these effects, predatory fish fingerlings can be introduced to diminish the population
growth of the planktonic and benthic fish. Artificial refuges can be placed to provide
habitats for zooplankton and pike. The artificial refuges are important when the
development of submerged aquatic plants (macrophytes) is insufficient to serve this
purpose.
The introduction of predatory fish can be effective. Interventions into established
hypertrophic ecosystem structures by fish stock management techniques have proved
successful in smaller ponds and lakes over shorter periods of time (Hrbácek et al., 1978).
If successful the water may become clearer due to a reduction of algal and/or
cyanobacterial turbidity, the zooplankton populations increase, and fields of macrophytes
may develop which compete for phosphate with the phytoplankton (thus reducing their
capacity for growth) (see below). However, the breeding success of the remaining
planktivorous fish stock in the lake will be high if insufficient predatory fish are present.
Continued control of the development of the fish stocks is required, and the removal of
planktivorous fish must be repeated regularly. Depending upon local salary levels, this
may be expensive in terms of personnel. Biomanipulation is by no means a cheap
method because of the continuous monitoring and management requirements. It is also
unlikely that the technique will work naturally and unaided once the change in biological
structure has been introduced.
A disadvantage of biomanipulation is that not all phytoplankton species are eaten
efficiently by zooplankton. Stimulating the zooplankton without reducing concentrations
of phytoplankton nutrients may stimulate dominance of inedible phytoplankton species,
such as colony-forming (Microcystis, Aphanizomenon) or filamentous cyanobacteria
(Planktothrix agardhii), or the green alga, Enteromorpha. High nutrient levels may also
stimulate the growth of epiphytic algal species which grow on the surfaces of
macrophytes and suppress their development.
Box 8.9 Ecosystem theory to explain how biomanipulation works
As indicated in section 2.2, eutrophic systems with blooms of Planktothrix (formerly Oscillatoria)
can show enormous stability, with uninterrupted dominance over years. May (1977) indicated that
multispecies assemblages of plants and animals can have several different equilibrium states.
Scheffer (1990) highlighted this for shallow eutrophic lakes. He concluded that during the process
of lake restoration, two different equilibria are possible at a state of moderate eutrophication - one
with large populations of phytoplankton and planktivorous and benthic fish, and another in which
nutrients are incorporated more evenly distributed among zooplankton, fish and macrophytes.
The first system is turbid, the second system is clear. Resilience of the ecosystem during
restoration maintains the turbid state over long periods, particularly if phosphate concentrations
oscillate around the threshold effective for reducing phytoplankton biomass, but do not
substantially decline below this level. In such situations, biomanipulation can help to switch the
ecosystem from a turbid phytoplankton community to a clear macrophyte community.
Enhancing competition by introducing macrophytes
The introduction of macrophytes has the best chance of success in water bodies with a
relatively large shallow littoral area (< 2-3 m deep) and at moderate concentrations of
total phosphorus. Reynolds (1997) points out that if the areal nutrient input rate leads to
phosphorus concentrations above 0.15 mg 1-1, phytoplankton density can readily reach
0.15 mg 1-1 of chlorophyll a, and then submerged macrophytes will simply be "shaded
out". However, at lower concentrations of phosphorus, particularly in spring,
macrophytes have the chance to begin to grow and to incorporate enough of the
available phosphorus to achieve substantial phosphorus limitation of phytoplankton
biomass. Particularly if combined with the management of fish stocks, measures to
support macrophytes may switch an aquatic ecosystem into a different, sometimes
rather stable, biological structure resulting in clear water and low cyanobacterial biomass
(Box 8.9).
General assessment
Reynolds (1997) summarises current knowledge on mechanisms of biomanipulation
under the heading "bottom-up or top-down control"; "bottom up" implies control by
nutrients and "top-down" implies control by the top end of the food chain, i.e. by
consumers. Reynolds (1997) lists arguments against biomanipulation, such as self-
starvation of consumers by outstripping the availability of phytoplankton or
consequences for other components of the food web, and points out that the conceptual
flaw is thinking in terms of "steady states". He comments:
"the state that generally attains is a lurching alteration between responses to plenty and
responses to over-consumption.... When tropically-related organisms, with lives
measured in hours to years, inhabit environments fluctuating with periods of days to
months, their interactions are certainly likely sometimes to result in strong top-down
pressures on producer biomass. At other times, however, the trophic cascade slows
down to barely a trickle" (Reynolds, 1997).
These dynamic fluctuations are most likely to occur, such that they affect phytoplankton
populations, in situations which are not extremely biased by total lack of nutrient
limitation. Biomanipulation as a management tool to reduce algal or cyanobacterial
growth is most likely to be successful in situations of moderate nutrient concentrations
and in combination with reductions in inputs. Experience shows that, as long as the
trophic level of the systems remains high, the risk that the ecosystem switches back into
its original composition is also higher. For reviews of biomanipulation see Demerol et al.
(1992), Carpenter and Kitchell (1992) and Moss et al. (1994).
8.5.7 Algicides
Algicides, especially copper sulphate, have been used rather widely in some regions to
kill prevailing cyanobacterial blooms. As a result of the Palm Island catastrophe (see
section 4.1) it was established that lysine a bloom may exacerbate problems because
toxins previously contained within the cells are liberated and pass through drinking water
filters far more readily than toxins within intact cells (see also Lam et al., 1995).
Nevertheless, preventative treatment at the beginning of bloom development has been
widely used (Cameron, 1989) and may be necessary (see section 9.2).
Algicide treatment of water bodies is best considered as an emergency measure and
may involve ecological risks. Toxic copper deposits may accumulate in the sediments
(Prepas and Murphy, 1988). Repeated treatment may induce shifts in species
composition towards more copper-resistant, but not necessarily more pleasant, species.
This was the case in Lake Matthews, a drinking water reservoir for California, where
taste-and-odour problems caused by Oscillatoria spp. were handled by copper sulphate
application. Within very few years, the dosage needed to combat these species had to
be increased from 27 to 400 t. The treatment led to the replacement of Oscillatoria by a
more copper-resistant cyanobacterium, Phormidium sp., which prevailed for longer time
spans and caused almost all year-round off-flavour problems (Izaguirre, 1992). Other
undesirable ecosystem impacts of algicide treatment cannot be excluded. Wherever
possible, it is preferable to choose abatement measures which address the source of the
problem (i.e. growth conditions for cyanobacteria) because such solutions may be
effective in the long term and actually safeguard human health by improving
environmental quality.
8.5.8 Barley straw
The use of decomposing barley straw for the control of cyanobacteria and microalgae
has been investigated recently (Welch et al., 1990; Jelbart, 1993; Newman and Barrett,
1993; Everall and Lees, 1996). The effect of rotting barley straw in reducing filamentous
green algal growth was reported by Welch et al. (1990) and algistatic effects were shown
in laboratory cultures of the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa by Newman and
Barrett (1993). The inhibitory effects were suggested to be due to antibiotic production
by the fungal flora or to the release of phenolic compounds such as ferulic acid and f-
coumaric acid from the decomposition of the straw cell walls.
A reduction in cyanobacterial populations has also been reported in reservoir trials after
applying barley straw (Everall and Lees, 1996). These authors suggested that phytotoxic
compounds released from decomposing straw inhibited the cyanobacterial populations,
but that further chemical identification, and risk and environmental assessment were
required prior to use in water supply reservoirs. However, a recent full-scale field trial
has been carried out in a potable supply reservoir and was credited with reducing
regular summer cyanobacterial populations (Barrett et al., 1996). Although these trials
gave apparently favourable algistatic results, they were carried out without replication or
control trials and, as such, the study design cannot account for the influence of other
factors (such as impact of weather conditions) on phytoplankton development and
succession. An earlier trial which did include the dosing with barley straw of one of a pair
of closely adjacent lakes (with similar hydrology and biology) resulted in a decrease in
the cyanobacterial population in the straw-dosed lake as compared with the non-dosed
lake, throughout the two years of post-dose monitoring (Harriman et al., 1997).
There are conflicting data from Australia on the effects of barley straw. Jelbart (1993)
failed to find any inhibitory effects with extracts of rotting straw on Microcystis
aeruginosa isolates. Cheng et al. (1995) also found no algicidal or algistatic effects from
barley straw over a six month period in a comprehensive field trial in six experimental
ponds. The ponds were fertilised to encourage cyanobacterial growth and there were no
differences in species composition or final standing crop between control and straw-
dosed ponds.
These contradictory findings and the unknown identity of the inhibitory factors in rotting
barley straw indicate that straw-dosing is still too poorly understood to recommend for
reliable use as a cyanobacterial control measure, particularly in potable water supply
reservoirs. Whether barley-straw dosing influences the composition and size of toxin
pools in cyanobacterial populations still needs to be determined. Dosing with barley
straw has gained unwarranted popularity and notoriety because it is an apparently
simple procedure which is relatively inexpensive and highly visible. It is being used in
freshwaters for cyanobacterial control in some countries even though the benefits are
dubious (e.g. the introduction of rotting, oxygen-consuming organic matter needs
consideration).
8.5.9 Other approaches
A market for rapid and cheap water resource protection and restoration methods is
evolving. In Europe, poorly validated methods for reduction of cyanobacterial and
phytoplankton growth are being advertised, some of which are questionable. In some
cases, transient success was actually due to natural seasonal "clear water" phenomena.
Although new approaches require field testing as part of development, independent
verification of their success can reasonably be requested of their promoters prior to
marketing. Public health officers and other public authorities are trained in other fields
than environmental sciences and rarely have the expertise to judge restoration
proposals. Review by environmental authorities or experts is therefore desirable prior to
investment.
8.6 References
Barica, J. and Allan, R.J. 1997 Aquatic ecosystem restoration. Wat. Qual. Res. J.
Canada, 32, 452 pp.
Barrett, P.R.F., Curnow, J.C. and Littlejohn, J.W. 1996 The control of diatom and
cyanobacterial blooms in reservoirs using barley straw. Hydrobiologia, 340(1-3), 307-311.
Bartram, J. and Ballance, R. 1996 Water Quality Monitoring. A Practical Guide to the
Design and Implementation of Freshwater Quality Studies and Monitoring Programmes.
E & FN Spon, London, 383 pp.
Bossard, P. and Gächter, R. 1996 Controversial hypothesis related to the ban on
phosphates. EAWAG News, 42E, 18-20.
Cameron, C.D. 1989 Is this a way to run a reservoir? In: Practical Lake Management for
Water Quality Control. Proceedings of a Seminar, Los Angeles, CA, American
Waterworks Association, Denver, 63-83.
Carpenter, S.R. and Kitchell, J.F. 1992 Trophic cascade and biomanipulation: interface
of research and management. A reply to the comment by De Melo et al. Limnol.
Oceanog., 37, 208-213.
Charlton, M. 1997 The sewage issue in Hamilton Harbour: Implications of population
growth for the remedial action plan. Wat. Qual. Res. J. Canada, 32, 407-420.
Cheng, D., Jose, S. and Mitrovic, S. 1995 Assessment of the possible algicidal and
algistatic properties of barley straw in experimental ponds - confirmatory trial. Report
prepared for the State Algal Coordinating Committee, University of Technology, Sydney,
21 pp.
Cooke, G.D. and Kennedy, R.H. 1981 Precipitation and Inactivation of Phosphorus as a
Lake Restoration Technique. Technical Report EPA-600/8-81/012, Environment
Protection Agency.
Cooke, G.D., Welch, E.B., Peterson S.A. and Newroth P.R. (Eds) 1993 Restoration and
Management of Lakes and reservoirs. Second edition, Lewis Publishers, CRC Press Inc.,
Boca Raton, Fla., 548 pp.
Cuddy, S., Young B., Davis R. and Farley T. 1997 Trialing the Catchment Management
Support System in the Murrumbidgee catchment, New South Wales. In: J.R.D. Davis
[Ed.] Managing Algal Blooms: Outcomes from the CSIRO Blue-Green Algal Research
Program. CSIRO Land and Water, Canberra, 103-113.
Davis, J.R. and Farley, T.F.N. 1997 CMSS: Policy analysis software for catchment
managers. J. Env. Modelling and Software, 12, 197-210.
DeMelo, R., France, R. and McQueen, D.J. 1992 Biomanipulation - hit or myth? Limnol.
Oceanog., 37, 192-207.
Everall, N.C. and Lees, D.R. 1996 The use of barley-straw to control general and blue-
green algal growth in a Derbyshire reservoir. Wat. Res. 30(2), 269-276.
Fleischer, H. 1996 (Kommunale Wasserwerke Leipzig GmbH, Johannesgasse 7-9, D-
04103 Leipzig) Biologischer Landbau im Einzugsgebiet von Waserversorgungsanlagen -
Ergebnisse und Perspektiven. 3. Wasserhygienetage Bad Elster, 5-7 February 1996.
Gächter, R. 1976 Die Tiefenwasserableitung, ein Weg zur Sanierung von Seen. Schweiz.
Z. Hydrolog,. 38, 1-28.
Gardner, W.S., Nalepa, T.F., Quigley, M. and Malczyk, J. 1981 Release of phosphorus
by benthic invertebrates. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 38, 978-981.
Gemza, A.F. 1977 Water quality improvements during hypolimnetic oxygenation in two
Ontario lakes. Wat. Qual. Res. J. Canada, 32, 365-390.
Gleisberg, D., Erftstadt, H. and Hahn, H. 1995 Zur Entwicklung der Phospherentfernung
aus Abwässern der Bundesrepublik Deutschland. Korrespondenz Abwasser, 42, 958-
969.
Gray, N.F. 1994 Drinking Water Quality. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 315 pp.
Harremoes, P. 1997 The challenge of managing water and material balances in relation
to eutrophication. In: R. Roijackers, R.H. Aalderink and G. Blorn [Eds] Eutrophication
Research, State-of-the-Art. Department of Water Quality Management and Aquatic
Ecology, Wageningen Agricultural University, 3-12.
Harriman, R., Adamson, E.A., Shelton, R.G.J. and Moffett, G. 1997 An assessment of
the effectiveness of straw as an algal inhibitor in an upland Scottish loch. Biocon. Sci.
Technol., 7(2), 287-296.
Heinzmann, B. and Chorus, I.1994 Restoration concept for Lake Tegel, a major drinking
and bathing water resource in a densely populated area. Environ. Sci. Technol., 28,
1410-1416.
Höllein, K. 1996 (Hauptabteilung Wasserversorgung, Unterer Anger 3, D-80287
München) Biologischer Landbau 1996 - Lösungsweg für die Koexistenz von
Wasserwirtschaft und Landwirtschaft. (biological farming - solutions for coexistence of
water supplies and agriculture) 3. Wasserhygienetage Bad Elster, 5-7 February 1996.
Hrbácek, J., Desortová, B. and Popovský, J. 1978 Influence offish stock on the
phosphorus-chlorophyll-ration. Verh. Verein. Theor. Ang. Limnol., 20, 1624-1628.
Izzaguire, G. 1992 A copper-tolerant phormidium species from Lake Mathiews,
California, that produces 2-methylisoborneol and geosmin. Wat. Sci. Tech.. 25, 217-223.
Jelbart, J. 1993 Effect of rotting barley straw on cyanobacteria: a laboratory investigation.
Water, 5, 31-32.
Kenefick, S.L., Hrudey, S.E., Peterson, H.G. and Prepas E.E. 1993 Toxin release from
Microcystis aeruginosa after chemical treatment. Wat. Sci. Technol., 27, 433-440.
Kitchell, J.F. [Ed.] 1992 Food Web Management - A Case Study of Lake Mendota.
Springer Verlag, New York, 553 pp.
Klapper, H. 1992 Eutrophierung und Gewässerschutz. Gustav Fischer Vlg. Jena,
Stuttgart, 277 pp.
Köhler, A. and Klein, M. 1997 Cyanobakterien und die Nutzung der Berliner Gewässer.
In: I. Chorus [Ed.] Toxische Cyanobakterien in deutschen Gewässern. WaBoLu Hefte
4/97, 58-66.
Lam, A.K.Y., Prepas, E.E., Spink, D. and Hrudey, S.E. 1995 Chemical control of
hepatotoxic phytoplankton blooms: implications for human health. Wat. Res., 29, 1845-
1854.
Lindenschmidt, K.E., Suhr, M., Magumba, M.K., Hecky, R.E. and Bugenyi, F.W.B. 1998
Loading of solute and suspended solids from rural catchment areas flowing unto Lake
Victoria in Uganda. Wat. Res., 32, 2776-2786.
May, R. 1977 Thresholds and breakpoints in ecosystems with a multiplicity of stable
states. Nature, 269, 471-477.
Moss, B., McGowan, S. and Carvalho, L. 1994 Determination of phytoplankton crops by
top-down and bottom-up mechanisms in a group of English lakes, the West Midland
meres. Limnol. Oceanog., 39, 1020-1029.
Murphy, T.P, Prepas E.E., Lim, J.T., Crosby, J.M. and Walty, D.T. 1990 Evaluation of
calcium carbonate and calcium hydroxide treatments of prairie drinking water dugouts.
Lake Reserv. Manage. 6, 101-108.
Newman, J. and Barrett, P.R.F. 1993 Control of Microcystis aeruginosa by decomposing
barley straw. J. Aq. Plant Manage., 31, 203-206.
Nürnberg, G.K. 1988 The prediction of phosphorus release rates from total and
reductant-soluble phosphorus in anoxic lake sediments. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 45,
453-462.
Nürnberg, G.K. 1997 Coping with water quality problems due to hypolimnetic anoxia in
Central Ontaria Lakes. Wat. Qual. Res. J. Canada, 32, 391-405.
Oenema, O. and Roest, C.W.J. 1997 Nitrogen and phosphorus losses from agriculture
into surface waters. In: R. Roijackers, R.H Aalderink and G. Blorn [Eds] Eutrophication
Research, State-of-the-Art. Department of Water Quality Management and Aquatic
Ecology, Wageningen Agricultural University, 13-15.
Olszewski, P. 1961 Versuch einer Ableitung des hypolimnischen Wassers an einem See.
Ergebnisse des ersten Versuchsjahres. Verh. Int. Ver. Limnol., 18, 1792-1797.
Packham, R.F. 1994 The contamination of water from agriculture. In: A.M.B Golding, N.
Noah and R. Stanwell-Smith Water and Public Health. Sith Gordon and Co. Limited and
Nishimura Co. Limited, 145-154.
Paetsch, B. and Kötter, K. 1980 Verminderung der Algenentwicklung in der Talsperre
Haltern durch Phosphat-Faellung. Gwf-wasser/abwasser, 212, 496-498.
Prepas, E.E. and Murphy, T.P. 1988 Sediment-water interactions in farm dugouts
previously treated with copper sulfate. Lake Reserv. Manage., 4, 161-168.
Prepas, E.E., Murphy, T.P., Crosby, J.M., Walty, D.T., Lim, J.T., Babin J.M. and
Chambers, P.A. 1990 Reduction of phosphorus and chlorophyll a concentrations
following CaCO and Ca(OH) additions in hypereutrophic Figure Eight Lake, Alberta.
3 2
Environ. Sci. Technol., 24, 1252-1258.
Prepas, E.E., Murphy, T.P., Dinsmore, W.P., Burke, J.M., Chambers, P.A. and Reedyk,
S. 1997 Lake management based on lime application and hypolimnetic oxygenation: the
experience in eutrophic hardwater lakes in Alberta. Wat. Qual. Res. J. Canada, 32, 273-
293.
Reynolds, C.S. 1997 Vegetation Processes in the Pelagic: A Model for Ecosystem
Theory. Excellence in Ecology, Ecology Institute, Oldendorf-Luhe, 371 pp.
Rönicke, H. 1986 Beitrag zur Fixation des molekularen Stickstoffs durch planktische
Cyanophyceen in einem dimiktischen, schwach durchfolssenen Standgewässer. Diss. A.
Humboldt-Univ. Berlin, 129 pp.
Round, F.E. 1965 The Biology of the Algae. Edward Arnold, London.
Ryding, S.O. 1979 Reversibility of man-induced eutrophication. Experiences of a lake
recovery study in Sweden. Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol., 66, 449-503.
Sas, H. 1989 Lake Restoration by Reduction of Nutrient Loading: Expectations,
Experiences, Extrapolations. Academia Vlg. Richarz, 479 pp.
Scheffer, M. 1990 Multiplicity of stable states in freshwater systems. Hydrobiologia,
200/201, 475-486.
Siegrist, H. and Boller, M. 1997 Effects of the phosphate ban on sewage treatment.
EAWAG News, 42 E, 9-11.
Somlyody, L. and van Straten, G. 1986 Background to the Lake Balaton Eutrophication
Problem. In: L. Somlyody and van Straten [Eds] Modeling and Managing Shallow Lake
Eutrophication. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 3-18.
Such, W. 1996 (Wahnbachtalsperrenverband, Kronprinzenstr. 13, D-53721 Siegburg)
1995 Kooperation Wasserwirtschaft - Landwirtschaft. 3. Wasserhygienetage Bad Elster,
5-7 February 1996.
Trudgill, S.T. [Ed.] 1995 Solute Modelling in Catchment Systems. John Wiley and Sons,
Inc. N.Y., 460 pp.
P.M. Visser, Ibelings, B.W., van der Veer, B., Koedood, J. and Mur, L.R. 1996 Artificial
mixing prevents nuisance blooms of the cyanobacterium Microcystis in lake Nieuw Meer,
the Netherlands. Freshwat. Biol., 36, 435-450.
Vollenweider, R. and Kerekes, J. 1982 Eutrophication of Waters, Monitoring,
Assessment, Control. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.
Wehrli, B., Wüest, A., Bührer, H., Gächter, R. and Zobrist, J. 1996 Überdüngung der
Schweizer Seen - erfreulicher Trend nach unten. EAWAG News, 42D, 12-14.
Welch, E.B., Buckley, J.A. and Bush, R.M. 1972 Dilution as an algal bloom control. J.
Water Poll. Contr. Fed., 44, 2245-2265.
Welch, I.M., Barren, P.R.F., Gibson M.T. and Ridge, I.1990 Barley straw as an inhibitor
of algal growth I: Studies in the Chesterfield Canal. J. App. Phycol., 2, 231-239.
Wetzel, R.G. 1983 Limnology. Second edition. Saunders College Publishing,
Philadelphia, 766 pp.
World Bank 1993 Water Resources Management. A World Bank Policy Paper. The
World Bank, Washington D.C., 140 pp.
Wüest, A. and Wehrli, B. 1996 Zehn Jahre Seenbelüftung - Erfahrungen und Optionen.
EAWAG News, 42D, 28-29.
Zhang, Y. and Prepas, E.E. 1996 Short-term effects of Ca(OH) additions on
2
phytoplankton biomass: a comparison of laboratory and in situ experiments. Wat. Res.,
30, 1285-1294.
Zehnder, A. 1996 Blick über die Grenzen. EAWAG News, 42D, 24-26.
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health consequences,
monitoring and management
Edited by Ingrid Chorus and Jamie Bartram
© 1999 WHO
ISBN 0-419-23930-8
Chapter 9. REMEDIAL MEASURES
This chapter was prepared by Steve Hrudey, Mike Burch, Mary Drikas and Ross
Gregory
The management and control of cyanobacteria in water supply storage facilities and of
cyanotoxins in drinking water may be approached at a number of points and levels in the
hierarchy of the total supply system. A detailed assessment of water supply systems
with respect to the potential impact of blooms and cyanotoxins on water quality and
public health has been presented in Chapter 6. The first preference for control is the
prevention of eutrophication, which is discussed in Chapter 8. The next level of
management response is reservoir and water body management which can include
some engineering techniques to alter hydrophysical conditions in the water body in order
to reduce cyanobacterial growth (section 8.5). The more immediate and short-term
control techniques which can be used in the management of raw water abstraction
include the avoidance of contamination by positioning of offtakes, selection of intake
depth, offtake by bank filtration, and the use of barriers to restrict scum movement.
Another intervention technique is chemical treatment with algicides. Algaecides have
been, and will continue to be, used as emergency measures for the control of
cyanobacteria, and their role in management strategies needs to be assessed from
practical and environmental viewpoints. The final option for management of
cyanobacterial problems and cyanotoxins in water supplies is within the treatment
system. Research on removal of algal and cyanobacterial cells has been widely
published (see review by Mouchet and Bonnélye, 1998) and recent work has generated
quite detailed knowledge on cyanotoxin removal during drinking water treatment.
Much of the work on cyanotoxin removal has focused on single treatment steps, and a
few studies have investigated the common combinations of coagulation, clarification and
filtration. As a research approach, this is useful because assessments of the
performance of individual treatment steps may be generalised more readily than
observations gained in complete, but individual, supply systems with their respective
site-specific characteristics. However, management approaches aimed at providing safe
drinking water from cyanobacteria-infested surface waters require considering the
system as a whole, and using different combinations of resource management tailored to
the specific locality and different treatment steps. In such an overall approach, steps that
individually may be unsatisfactory can have their place in combination with others and
thus contribute to a multi-barrier approach. Furthermore, the individual aspects of each
drinking water supply necessitate local assessment of performance as well as local
optimisation of resource management and treatment strategies.
9.1 Management of abstraction
Management of raw water abstraction is effective in reducing the amount of
cyanobacteria in the raw water, often by orders of magnitude. This can be achieved by
choosing an optimum position for the offtake, or by abstracting surface water through
bank filtration.
9.1.1 Direct abstraction from surface water bodies
General resource management, including hydraulic intervention measures, are
described in Chapter 8. The horizontal and vertical distribution of cyanobacterial
populations can vary enormously throughout a water body, whether in a lake, reservoir
or river. This has obvious implications for both the siting of offtakes and the choice of
offtake depth. Considerable contamination of raw water can be avoided by locating
offtakes away from sheltered bays where scums may accumulate (usually downwind of
the prevailing winds during the critical summer growth period). If this is not practical, it
may be possible to employ temporary extensions to pipe intake points.
Selection of offtake depth can also be important in reducing contamination by avoiding
surface or subsurface maxima of cell numbers. Many modern reservoir offtake structures
(towers) have the provision for multiple offtake depths. If multiple offtakes are not
available it may be possible to install siphon offtakes, at least as a temporary measure in
small systems. In relation to cyanobacterial contamination, the choice of intake depth
must take into account the time of daily maximum surface accumulation of cells and the
amplitude of passive diurnal vertical sinking and rising of cells due to light-and
photosynthetic-driven changes in cell buoyancy. In thermally stratified, mesotrophic
reservoirs, attention must be given to the possibility of meta-limnetic maxima (i.e.
maxima between warm upper and cold, lower water layers) of Planktothrix rubescens
(syn. Oscillatoria rubescens).
Operators need to become familiar with the amplitude of vertical movement of
cyanobacterial populations, and also with the potential for the formation of metalimnetic
peaks, in order to avoid high cell densities as much as possible. This requires multiple
depth sampling to determine vertical profiles of cyanobacterial cell density. Collecting
information and building up knowledge and understanding of local ecology and
conditions can increase flexibility in the management of blooms (see Chapter 10).
Another option to avoid contamination is to employ physical barriers or booms at the
surface to prevent surface scums accumulating near the offtake site. Surface booms or
curtains, similar to oil-spill containment booms, have been used successfully in Australia,
the UK and North America to keep surface scums away from offtake structures (see
Figure 9.1 in the colour plate section). These physical barriers often only extend to a
depth of 0.5-1.0 m, and do not affect bulk horizontal flow significantly. This technique is a
worthwhile emergency measure for transient blooms and its use will depend upon the
practical aspects of installation.
9.1.2 Bank filtration and groundwater recharge
An abstraction method that has proved to be very effective in removing particles and
many dissolved compounds in localities with suitable underground conditions is bank
filtration or abstraction of groundwater artificially recharged with surface water. The
process uses bore holes or infiltration galleries which are located near to the banks of a
surface water supply (river or reservoir). These wells fill with water which has infiltrated
through the intervening porous soil materials. Depending upon the underground
characteristics, water may travel for several hours, or even for weeks before it reaches
the well. Longer retention times may enhance purification, but even retention times of
between a few hours and days have substantially improved water quality. Many types of
soils may be suitable, provided they allow water flow, are not too coarsely structured to
achieve a filtering effect, or are not in contact with saline or otherwise unsuitable
groundwater. Planning bank filtration requires local assessment of sites for their
suitability.
Evaluation of bank filtration with respect to cyanotoxin removal is currently only
beginning, and no published results are available. A study of elimination of algal and
cyanobacterial taste and odour compounds has shown very effective removal by bank
filtration at three study sites (Chorus et al., 1993). Because of the generally positive
experience with respect to removal of suspended materials, micro-organisms and a
variety of chemical contaminants (Laszlo, 1984; UNDP/WHO, 1992) it may be expected
that bank filtration will be a highly promising abstraction method to avoid contamination
with cyanobacterial cells as well as dissolved toxins. This expectation is supported by
the favourable results of a laboratory study from Finland which demonstrated good
performance of experimental soil and sediment columns for both cell and toxin removal
(Lahti et al., 1996). In this case, lake water was inoculated with both toxic and non-toxic
cultures of cyanobacterial cells and pure microcystin-LR and filtered through soil and
lake sediment columns. It was found that during the experimental period of one week,
both cells and dissolved toxins were removed very efficiently, although there was some
breakthrough in sediment columns at high loadings. The mean rates of removal for cells
were 93.7-99.7 per cent and 97.5-99.5 per cent for extracellular toxins for both soil and
sediment columns. It was suggested that the removal of microcystins in this filtration
process was the result of both adsorption and biodegradation (Lahti et al., 1996).
However, the relative performance of the two processes would be very site specific and
dependent upon local soil characteristics and microbial activity.
The performance of bank filtration in relation to adsorption capacity, overloading and the
potential for release over time of toxins from trapped cells would require monitoring (see
Chapter 13 for methods).
9.2 Use of algicides
Algaecides are used in reservoirs to control cyanobacterial growth and to prevent or
reduce to some extent the problems of toxins in the associated drinking water supply.
Their role in the management scheme may be to provide effective short-term control of
growth of cyanobacteria, at one point in time, particularly in circumstances where
alternative drinking water sources are not available and preventive measures (as
outlined in Chapter 8) are not feasible or not yet effective. Algicide treatment has been
proposed as being more cost-effective than toxin removal in drinking water treatment
plants, as has been suggested for the control of off-flavour problems (McGuire and
Gaston, 1988), because an extended period of persistent blooms greatly enhances the
need for additional treatment for toxin removal. However, experience with abatement of
off-flavours caused by cyanobacteria through algicide treatment has also demonstrated
that this treatment may actually enhance the problem by supporting the development of
species resistant to the treatment (Izaguirre, 1992).
Environmental concerns have been raised because the most commonly used algicide,
copper sulphate, has broad ecological impact. It should be used only in dedicated water
supply reservoirs in special circumstances, but is nevertheless an unsatisfactory long-
term solution. In many countries, national or local environmental regulations prohibit or
limit the use of algicides due to their adverse environmental impact. This needs to be
established prior to considering the use of algicides.
Algicides, like all management techniques, must be applied correctly to work effectively.
If algicides are used they must be applied at the early stages of bloom development
when cell densities are low, in order to reduce the potential for liberation of the high
concentrations of intracellular toxin that may be associated with dense blooms. Early
application will further enhance the effectiveness of treatment because cyanobacterial
cells can form a major part of the "copper demand" along with other organic matter in
natural water.
A major limitation of any agent which disrupts cyanobacterial cells is the release of
toxins and of taste and odour compounds from the cells. A range of studies have
indicated that cyanotoxins are predominantly intracellular in healthy cells, and are only
released into the water at an advanced stage of bloom senescence, or following
treatment with chemicals such as algicides (Lahti et al., 1996). This release can be quite
rapid and has been shown to occur within 3-24 hours in different studies (Jones and Orr,
1994; Kenefick et al., 1993). These dissolved toxins will then disperse and be diluted
throughout the water body, but will not be removed by conventional flocculation and
filtration procedures. Installation of additional treatment for removing cyanotoxins may be
costly. The dangers of treating dense blooms with algicides was demonstrated in an
incident which occurred on tropical Palm Island, Australia, where members of the
community became ill with hepato-enteritis following treatment of the water supply
reservoir with copper sulphate for a cyanobacterial bloom problem (Bourke et al., 1983)
(see Box 4.3).
If algicides are used to control toxic cyanobacteria, the reservoir should be isolated for a
period to allow the toxins and odours to degrade (see section 3.4). Unfortunately, very
little data exist on the withholding period in relation to toxin loss, but it could be in excess
of 14 days (Jones and Orr, 1994).
In some cases algicide treatment may be unsuccessful or only partially successful. This
can be due to inadequate dispersal and contact with the target organisms, variable
sensitivity of cyanobacteria, and reduced toxicity due to complexation of the copper
(Burch et al., 1998). The form of copper most toxic to aquatic organisms is the free
cupric ion (Cu2+) and this can be reduced by complexation with both inorganic ligands
under alkaline conditions, and organic ligands present in natural waters (McKnight et al.,
1983).
9.2.1 Copper sulphate
Chemical control of algae in water supply storage has been a widespread water quality
management practice for over 100 years. Records of the use of copper sulphate date
from 1890 in Europe (Sawyer, 1962), from 1904 in the USA (Moore and Kellerman,
1905), and at least since the mid 1940s in Australia (Burch et al., 1998). Copper
sulphate has been regarded as the algicide of choice because it is economical, effective,
relatively safe and easy to apply. It is also considered to be of limited significance to
human health at the doses commonly used (WHO, 1996) and has been considered not
to cause extensive environmental damage (McKnight et al., 1983; Elder and Home,
1978). The latter point has been an issue of debate for some time (see Mackenthun and
Cooley, 1952) because copper tends to accumulate in lake sediments (Sanchez and Lee,
1978; Hanson and Stefan, 1984). In some cases it appears not to be remobilised and is
bound permanently to the bottom sediments (Elder and Home, 1978; Sanchez and Lee,
1978). However, in a study of 10 drinking water dugouts (small reservoirs) in Canada,
sediment copper (previously accumulated from copper sulphate treatments) was
released back into the open water under low dissolved oxygen conditions in the
hypolimnion in summer (Prepas and Murphy, 1988). It has also been suggested that
sediment-bound copper could have an impact on the benthic macroinvertebrate
community (Hanson and Stefan, 1984). It is important to remember that copper and
other heavy metals differ from some other toxic contaminants in that they are not
biodegradable, and once they have entered the environment their potential toxicity is
controlled largely by their speciation or physicochemical form (Florence, 1982). Copper
sulphate treatment has been shown to cause short-term changes in phytoplankton
abundance and species succession (Effler et al., 1980; McKnight, 1981). Fish kills may
also occur following copper sulphate treatment, although it is not clear whether this is as
a result of copper toxicity or oxygen depletion (Hanson and Stefan, 1984).
A recent extensive survey of water utilities in the USA and Canada indicated that copper
sulphate is by far the most widely used algicide, although other alternatives are used
under some circumstances (Casitas Municipal Water District, 1987). Some of the
compounds that have been used and evaluated for potential as algicides over the years
are summarised in Table 9.1.
McKnight et al. (1983) give an assessment of the use of copper sulphate for the control
of nuisance algae and cyanobacteria. They also indicate that there are wide differences
in copper sensitivity among species. The relative growth inhibiting concentrations for a
range of phytoplankton are given in terms of cupric ion activity (i.e. [Cu2+]), derived from
laboratory toxicity studies. The toxic cupric ion activities range from greater than 10-6-10-11
M (0.063-6.3 × 10-7 mg l-1 Cu2+) for species of diatoms, dinoflagellates, green algae and
cyanobacteria - a difference of over four orders or magnitude (McKnight et al., 1983).
These toxic Cu2+ concentrations are very much less than the usual doses applied as total
copper in copper sulphate treatments. The relative toxicity is given in terms of ionic
copper because it is believed that phytoplankton react principally to the concentration of
Cu2+ or loosely complexed copper rather than the total dissolved metal in the water.
McKnight et al. (1983) have used these findings to develop an experimental procedure
to determine the required dose rates for target species in individual reservoirs, taking
account of the particular water chemistry. This experimental procedure to determine
dose rates is suggested as more effective than simple empirical formulae, based on pH
and alkalinity, which were not very useful (McKnight et al., 1983). The experimental
approach requires access by the water supply operators to a good level of biological and
chemical expertise and analytical capacity. The approach is based on first determining
the cupric ion activity as a function of added copper, and thereby the complexing
capacity of the reservoir water by a copper ion selective electrode. This is followed by a
culture assay to determine the sensitivity of the particular nuisance algae to copper. The
local nuisance species preferably need to have been isolated into laboratory culture. The
required copper sulphate dose rates can be derived from a simple formula relating
growth inhibition, in terms of cupric ion concentration, to the Cu2+ concentrations in the
reservoir after complexation (McKnight et al., 1983).
Table 9.1 Compounds that have been used as algicides, their formulation and key
references
Compound Formulation Reference(s)
Copper sulphate CuSO .5H O McKnight et al., 1983;
4 2
Holden, 1970; Palmer, 1962;
Casitas Municipal Water
District, 1987
Cutrine® - plus Cu alkanolamine. 3H O++1 Humburg et al., 1989
2
Copper - triethanolamine complex Cu N(CH CH OH) .H O Humburg et al., 1989
2 2 3 2
Copper citrate Cu [(COOCH ) C(OH)COO] Casitas Municipal Water
3 2 2 2
District, 1987; Raman, 1988;
McKnight et al., 1983;
Fitzgerald and Faust, 1963
Potassium permanganate KMnO Fitzgerald, 1966; Holden, 1970
4
Chlorine Cl Holden, 1970
2
1 Copper II alkanolamine complex
9.2.2 Copper chelates
The problem of the reduced effectiveness of copper sulphate treatment in hard alkaline
water has long been recognised (Palmer, 1962; Casitas Municipal Water District, 1987).
Chelated copper algicides were developed to overcome the problems of the
complexation and precipitation loss of toxic copper under these circumstances.
Examples of copper chelate algicides include copper ethanolamine complexes and
copper citrate (Table 9.1). Copper citrate has been used as an algicide in the USA
(Casitas Municipal Water District, 1987; Raman, 1988). It is available either as a
commercial preparation (Hoffman et al., 1982) or by simultaneously dosing copper
sulphate and citric acid (Raman, 1988). It is claimed that the use of citric acid as a
chelating agent enhances the solubility of copper allowing it to remain in solution longer
under alkaline conditions (Raman, 1985; 1988). Raman (1988) recommends applying
copper sulphate: citric acid in the weight ratio 2:1 in high-alkalinity waters (> 40 mg l-1
CaCO ). A study which examined equilibrium speciation of copper in water to determine
3
the changes in distribution of Cu(II) in relation to pH, dissolved organic carbon (DOC)
and citrate was carried out by Casitas Municipal Water District (1987). This study
demonstrated that citrate greatly enhances the solubility of copper even in the presence
of appreciable alkalinity (100 mg 1-1). McKnight et al. (1983) suggested that the
advantage of using synthetic copper chelating agents in hard, alkaline waters probably
results from decreasing the supersaturation of malachite (Cu(OH) CO ) and tenorite
2 3
(CuO) and thereby the rate at which equilibrium with these insoluble forms (precipitates)
is approached. It is possible that a longer time taken to reach equilibrium would result in
the maintenance of toxic ionic Cu2+ activities and the inhibition of algal growth for longer
periods after dosing (McKnight et al., 1983). It is acknowledged that, despite their
relatively widespread use in the USA, the efficacy of chelated copper algicides in relation
to water chemistry is poorly understood (Casitas Municipal Water District, 1987).
9.2.3 Use of oxidants
Potassium permanganate has been used as an algicide from as early as 1935 (Holden,
1970). A survey of North American utilities indicated that a small number use potassium
permanganate relative to those who use copper sulphate (Casitas Municipal Water
District, 1987). Commercial formulations of potassium permanganate marketed
specifically as algicides are available in the USA (Casitas Municipal Water District, 1987).
Fitzgerald (1966) investigated the relative toxicity of potassium permanganate to eight
species of algae and cyanobacteria and found the algicidal dose was in the range 1-5
mg l-1, except for one green algae where up to 8 mg l-1 was required.
Chlorine is used mainly for control of algae in water treatment works but is also known to
have been employed in reservoir situations (Holden, 1970). The effective dose rates are
dependent on the chlorine demand of the water, but most algae are reported to be
controlled by residues of free chlorine between 0.25 and 2.0 mg 1-1 (Holden, 1970).
9.2.4 When to use algicides
Because cyanobacterial toxins are primarily intracellular, algicides must be used with
particular caution to avoid release of intracellular toxins. Algaecides should be used
when cell numbers are low to avoid excessive toxins or taints following rupture of the
cells. This should be checked by post-dosing monitoring. Algaecides may be used at
higher cell numbers only if the reservoir can be taken out of supply until the toxins and
taints degrade, or if treatment for removal of the toxins and taints is available. In the
latter cases the use of algicide should be assessed against the capability for whole cell
removal offered by treatment processes, because cell removal may be safer. It is
important to know how effective the chosen algicide is in the specific waters. For
example, copper may be less effective in waters with high dissolved carbonate or at
alkaline pH.
Table 9.2 Distribution of microcystins during laboratory culture of Microcystis aeruginosa
Age of culture Distribution of toxins (%)
Cells Water
Young
Slowly-growing cells 100 0
Rapidly-growing cells 75-90 10-25
Old
Slowly-growing intact cells 70-80 20-30
Decaying cells (leaking cell contents) 30-40 60-70
Source: National Rivers Authority, 1990
Algaecides should only be used in waters where the environmental impacts are
acceptable and this should be checked with the local environmental agency.
9.3 Efficiency of drinking water treatment in cyanotoxin removal
Cyanobacterial toxins represent a challenge to drinking water treatment which involves
removal of organic substances in both soluble and insoluble form. Water treatment
processes may remove target substances by either separation or conversion. Separation
processes are those which remove the target substance from the treated water, usually
to a treatment residual which becomes a waste stream for disposal. Conversion
processes involve transforming the target substance into a different chemical form,
thereby reducing the water quality problem. Although conversion processes are
sometime characterised as though they achieve destruction, there will always be
reaction products and thus transformation is a more accurate description than
destruction. Ideal conversion processes are those which yield innocuous reaction
products.
A major factor in assessing water treatment for cyanobacterial toxin removal involves
consideration of soluble and suspended substance removal. The primary toxins which
have been studied, microcystins, nodularins and anatoxins, are all water soluble.
However, laboratory observations for microcystins have shown that these toxins are
produced within the cyanobacterial cells and are expected to be predominantly found
within slow growing, healthy cells (Table 9.2).
Recent work (Mole et al., 1997) has shown that microcystin release from cultured
Microcystis aeruginosa began to occur late in the exponential growth phase and
increased significantly during the stationary phase. This release was linked to a
decrease in the integrity of the cells as determined by staining with fluorescein diacetate.
The amount of toxin release was influenced by the culture medium and reached as
much as 50 per cent in most commonly used media late in the stationary phase of
population growth.
Until a bloom collapses or is otherwise affected by some treatment practice, the majority
of toxins will be retained within the cells, making removal of intact cells a high treatment
priority. However, under bloom conditions, a substantial proportion of toxin would also be
expected to be released to the water column, making removal of soluble toxin an
unavoidable concern.
Physicochemical treatment has been shown to cause cell lysis and toxin release (James
and Fawell, 1991). Operational investigations in Africa demonstrated significant cell lysis
during extended transport in pipelines (Dickens and Graham, 1995). However, other
experiments conducted with cultured Microcystis showed that the flow and mixing
conditions associated with water treatment did not cause cell lysis or toxin release. In
addition, changes in pH from 5 to 9, which can occur in the treatment of some waters,
did not cause any release of the intracellular toxins (WRc, 1996). Effects of physical and
chemical stress on toxin release from cyanobacterial cells should therefore be assessed
in treatment and conveyance systems.
The following sections review the capacity of established and novel treatment processes
for the removal of cells and dissolved toxins.
9.3.1 Screening and prefiltration
Water treatment facilities usually employ coarse screens to remove debris from the
water intake. These screens have no effect on the removal of either cyanobacterial cells
or soluble toxins. However, microstrainers or fine screens may be used to remove larger
algae, cyanobacterial cells and aggregated cells. Mouchet and Bonnélye (1998) reported
removal rates of 40-70 per cent for two cyanobacterial species but pointed out that
smaller species (e.g. single cells and small colonies of Microcystis) are poorly retained
(to sometimes less than 10 per cent). Concerns regarding possible cell rupture, lysis and
toxin release resulting from pressure on the filter screen have not been sufficiently
addressed.
9.3.2 Aeration and air stripping
There are a number of methods for contacting air with water in drinking water treatment
that may be required for various purposes, such as to oxidise iron and manganese from
soluble to insoluble forms, to prevent reducing conditions which may yield odorous
compounds, and to remove dissolved gases such as carbon dioxide, hydrogen sulphide,
other reduced sulphur compounds and other volatile organic compounds (Hamann et al.,
1990).
Neither aeration nor air stripping will be effective for removing soluble toxins because
they are non-volatile compounds. Nor would they be effective for removal of
cyanobacterial cells (for aeration techniques applied in reservoirs to reduce growth of
cyanobacteria see section 8.5.5).
9.3.3 Coagulation and clarification
Coagulation promotes the aggregation of small, dispersed particles into larger particles
which can be separated by sedimentation, filtration or flotation (Grohman et al., 1985;
Hamann et al., 1990). Coagulation differs from precipitation because the latter involves
converting soluble substances into insoluble particles, whereas coagulation deals with
pre-existing dispersed particles such as mineral turbidity (clay, silt), larger molecular
weight natural organic matter, micro-organisms including cyanobacteria, and oxidised,
insoluble forms of iron and manganese.
Common chemicals used for drinking water coagulation include various aluminium and
ferric iron salts. More recently synthetic organic polymers have gained some acceptance.
Coagulation with multivalent metal salts can also be aided by adding various organic
polymers to promote floe growth. Leuschner (1984) reported substantially improved
flocculation of Planktothrix agardhii after addition of a cationic polymer. Efficient removal
of algae is dependent on optimisation of chemical doses and coagulation pH. Mouchet
and Bonnélye (1998) have shown that the coagulant dose necessary for algal removal is
proportional to the sum of alkalinity and the logarithm of cell number. They emphasise
that minimising turbidity in ajar test is not a sufficient criterion for adjusting treatment to
remove algae and cyanobacteria, and recommend measuring the electrophoretic
mobility of the cells (zeta potential) for optimising dosage (particularly because at
insufficient coagulant dose, cyanobacteria will be the last phytoplankton cells to be
removed). Bernhardt and Clasen (1991) have reported that coagulation of algal cells that
are smooth and more or less spherical occurs largely by charge neutralisation. In
contrast, filamentous algae, large algae or species with bristles on their cell surface can
be dealt with effectively only by sweep coagulation, by encountering the algae with large
amounts of metal hydroxide floe.
Coagulation, by its nature, offers some promise for removal of intact cyanobacterial cells.
For neurotoxins, Falconer (1989) reported that alum dosed at 120 mg l-1 alone and in
combination with a number of polyelectrolytes removed about 20 per cent of the toxicity
from a neurotoxic bloom of Anabaena circinalis. For microcystins, a number of published
studies have shown that coagulation has a negligible capability for removal of any
soluble toxins present in water. This has been demonstrated with aluminium sulphate
coagulation jar tests in which total toxin concentration was reduced as a result of the
removal of algal cells rather than the extracellular toxin (Figure 9.2) (WRc, 1996).
Rositano and Nicholson (1994) also demonstrated this expectation by evaluating
removal of purified, soluble microcystins by three coagulants: ferric sulphate, alum and
polyaluminium chloride. In all cases they found essentially no toxin removal. Lambert et
al. (1996) found inconsistent and low levels of microcystin removal (0-39 per cent)
across the coagulation-sedimentation stage of a small, full-scale water treatment plant
using an alum dose of over 60 mg l-1.
Figure 9.2 The effect of coagulation with alum on the concentration of intra- and
extracellular microcystin-LR (After Hart et al., 1997. Reproduced courtesy of
Blackwell Science)
By contrast, it must be emphasised that a study on raw water treatment with high doses
of alum (200 mg l-1) found over 23 per cent of the cell-bound microcystin-LR was
released, mostly within two days of treatment (Lam et al., 1995). However, at
concentrations and conditions that would occur in water treatment plants, Velzeboer et al.
(1995) found that aluminium sulphate did not appear to cause lysis of cells of cultured
Anabaena circinalis or Microcystis aeruginosa. Flocculation under laboratory conditions,
which simulated operating water treatment plants, resulted in removal of cells in a
healthy state, with no additional release of geosmin or microcystin-LR. Further work by
Chow et al. (1997a) using ferric chloride as the coagulant showed similar results with
some stimulation of growth of both algal species. There was no increase in
concentration of microcystin in the water following treatment of Microcystis aeruginosa,
although it appeared that Anabaena circinalis may be more susceptible to damage from
chemicals. Later work using alum in a pilot plant with cultured Microcystis aeruginosa
harvested at the late exponential phase of growth confirmed that the cells were not
damaged through the treatment process and that no additional toxin was released during
treatment (Drikas et al., 1997). However, this study also confirmed that the low
concentrations of extracellular microcystin present in the feed water (2-6 µg l-1) are not
removed during the treatment process. It was further found that the total cell number in
sludge collected from the pilot plant decreased to half its initial value after two days, and
that toxin release began virtually immediately, reaching almost 100 per cent after two
days. After five days the toxin concentration began to decrease and was reduced by
approximately 80 per cent after eight days and completely removed after 13 days. This
corresponds to findings of Jones and Orr (1994) who observed that bacterial
degradation of microcystin-LR occurred after nine days in a lake after chemical
treatment of a Microcystis aeruginosa bloom. The importance of toxin release from
sludge depends on the time that sludge is retained in sedimentation tanks and it could
have implications for sludge management, particularly if supernatant is returned from
sludge treatment processes to the head of the plant.
Selection of clarifier type will also affect cell removal rates. Mouchet and Bonnélye (1998)
have summarised experience largely from warm climates and have shown that sludge
blanket-type clarifiers are substantially more effective than static settlers (largely
because of longer flocculation time), particularly if upflow pulsed systems are used. This
achieved consistent reduction of total phytoplankton by 95-99 per cent at a plant treating
Seine River water, 95-98 per cent elimination of cyanobacteria at a Philippine plant (as
compared with 90-95 per cent removal by static settling), and 96.7-99.5 per cent removal
of Anabaena and Microcystis at an industrial-scale plant in Harare (Zimbabwe). In Cairo
and Alexandria, Egypt, older settling tanks were successfully upgraded to upflow pulsed
sludge blanket clarifiers, thus not only improving performance for algal and
cyanobacterial removal, but also efficiency per unit area and a reduction in coagulant
consumption by 15-45 per cent and chlorine consumption by 15-35 per cent.
9.3.4 Dissolved air flotation
Although coagulation is normally followed by a sedimentation step, in some waters
where the content of the suspended matter is low it is often easier to float the floe rather
than attempting to settle a light floe. Recycled water saturated with air under pressure is
introduced following the flocculation stage. Following the release of pressure the air
comes out of solution and forms tiny bubbles which attach to the floe and cause it to float
to the surface. The floated sludge is then collected and removed. This process is called
dissolved air flotation (DAF) and is more effective than sedimentation, particularly for
water with low turbidity and high colour, because the resultant floe is lighter and floats
easily.
Dissolved air flotation is also generally more effective than sedimentation processes for
treating algal-rich waters; for example floe blanket clarification has been shown to
remove 76.5 per cent of Microcystis cells whilst DAF removed 98 per cent in the
presence of other algae (Gregory and Zabel, 1990). A Belgian DAF plant achieved 40-80
per cent removal of Microcystis, 90-100 per cent removal of Anabaena but only 30 per
cent removal of Planktothrix (syn Oscillatoria) (Steffensen and Nicholson, 1994).
Markham et al., 1997) have reported on the efficiency of algae removal at eight DAF
plants. Like Bernhardt and Clasen (1991), they observed that the characteristics of algae
influence their removal by any clarification process. They found that most of the
treatment plants produced more than 80 per cent removal and they expected this would
be improved by optimisation. Vlaski et al. (1997) found that, in a pilot plant, DAF
achieved high particle (algae) removal during a cyanobacteria bloom (mainly Microcystis
aeruginosa).
Dissolved air flotation is unlikely to be more effective than conventional sedimentation
processes for removing extracellular toxins. It may, however, remove more intact cells
because the floating sludge tends to be removed more frequently than settled sludge in
horizontal flow tanks, where the algae may die and then lyse. This assumption needs to
be evaluated further.
Periods of high turbidity often cause problems for DAF, and any interruption in the
process leads to an interruption in the treatment process. Thus a stock of spare parts
and regular maintenance by qualified personnel are critical issues when using this
approach (Mouchet and Bonnélye, 1998).
9.3.5 Precipitation for hardness reduction
Conversion of soluble compounds into insoluble particulates for separation by
sedimentation or filtration is commonly used for water softening (calcium and
magnesium removal) and for iron and manganese removal (Hamann et al., 1990). Some
concurrent removal of soluble metals and dissolved natural organic matter may also be
achieved. Lime is commonly used for adjusting hardness or for precipitation of soluble
metals. This process typically uses rapid mixing followed by flocculation and
sedimentation.
No studies evaluating lime precipitation as a separate process in a water treatment plant
sequence are available. However, some insight into the expected removal of intracellular
toxins has been provided by two studies looking at treatment of raw water blooms with
lime. Kenefick et al. (1993) found that lime doses from 100 mg l-1 as Ca(OH)
2
precipitated the cells in cyanobacterial bloom material containing microcystin-LR without
releasing toxin compared with control batches over 14 days, while Lam et al. (1995)
found only 4 per cent release of microcystin-LR for the same lime dosage. These studies
suggest that lime softening would be effective at removing intracellular toxin by removing
the cyanobacterial cells without causing cell lysis, but that there is no evidence to
suggest that lime softening can reduce extracellular toxins.
9.3.6 Direct rapid filtration
Filtration is a process for the removal of suspended particulate matter, typically including
clay, silt, natural organic matter, coagulated floes, lime softening precipitates, iron and
manganese precipitates, and microorganisms (Hamann et al., 1990). Filters most
commonly use granular media such as coarse sand, crushed anthracite coal, garnet and
granular activated carbon (GAC). Direct filtration is applied for low turbidity waters by
filtering directly after coagulation/destabilisation without an intervening clarification stage
to remove the bulk of the floe. Conventional water treatment uses rapid filtration rates
which require regular backwashing to maintain performance.
Mouchet and Bonnélye (1998) reported poor removal rates of 10-75 per cent, depending
upon phytoplankton species, by direct rapid filtration without prior chemical treatment.
Drikas et al. (1997) found that removal of Microcystis aeruginosa cells in the filtration
stage of a pilot plant varied between 14 and 30 per cent following alum
coagulation/sedimentation. Lepisto et al. (1996) evaluated full scale water treatment
plants for their ability to remove cyanobacterial cells and found rapid sand filtration
achieved only a 14 per cent reduction in cells. Rapid sand filtration, including GAC was
somewhat better achieving 42 per cent reduction of cyanobacterial cells. These
researchers expressed concern over the possible fate of intracellular toxins which may
be released from degrading cells trapped in the filtration stage. Lambert et al. (1996)
found inconsistent incremental removal of microcystins from 14-60 per cent across a
dual media sand-anthracite filtration stage, following an alum coagulation-sedimentation
stage, at a small, full-scale water treatment plant.
As an overall assessment of direct rapid filtration for elimination of algae and
cyanobacteria, Mouchet and Bonnélye (1998) have indicated that direct filtration is
generally not satisfactory, unless more sophisticated multimedia filters and adequate
initial treatment are applied. They particularly emphasised the excellent results in algal
removal after pre-ozonation (explicitly with the aim of enhancing cell removal through
further steps, rather than for oxidation of cyanotoxins, see section 9.4.1).
A potential issue of concern, which currently has been inadequately investigated, is the
effect of long filter runs between backwashing. Death and lysis of cyanobacteria retained
on filters could lead to substantial toxin release.
9.3.7 Combined coagulation, sedimentation and rapid filtration
Conventional water treatment commonly involves the combination of coagulation,
clarification (sedimentation or dissolved air flotation) and filtration. Consequently, much
of the limited research that has been published on water treatment performance for the
removal of cyanotoxins has looked at overall removal across the common combinations
of coagulation-filtration and coagulation-clarification-filtration, rather than looking at each
stage individually.
Himberg et al. (1989) evaluated hepatotoxic fractions from Microcystis wesenbergii, M.
viridis and Planktothrix agardhii (syn. Oscillatoria agardhii) in bench-scale treatment
processes consisting of alum or ferric chloride coagulation combined with sand filtration
and chlorination. Alum coagulation, at doses from 36 to 71 mg l-1, with filtration achieved
toxin removals from 11 to 32 per cent, while ferric chloride at 55 mg l-1 achieved from 9 to
16 per cent. The removal contribution of the low chlorination dosage in this case was
apparently negligible. They also studied a similar conventional process at pilot scale
using freeze dried Microcystis bloom material and found negligible toxin removal (Keijola
et al., 1988). Nonetheless, Lambert et al. (1996) found combined microcystin removal
was 50-60 per cent across coagulation, sedimentation and dual media filtration in a
small full scale plant.
Similar studies at bench scale with anatoxin-a have indicated no removal for either alum
or ferric chloride process combinations at a toxin concentration of 20 µg l-1, but at 10
times higher toxin concentrations, the alum process achieved a 14 per cent anatoxin-a
removal and the ferric chloride process achieved a 49 per cent anatoxin-a removal
(Keijola et al., 1988).
Leuschner (1984) studied phytoplankton retention by flocculation, sedimentation and
rapid filtration in a plant treating highly eutrophic river water. Whereas Microcystis spp.
(occurring as large colonies) were rarely observed in the finished water, Planktothrix
agardhii was poorly retained, showing an average breakthrough of 27 per cent of the
filaments. As also reported by Mouchet and Bonnélye (1998), addition of a cationic
polymer during flocculation substantially improved retention.
The removal of whole, intact cells presents the best opportunity to remove toxins in
separation processes, whereas the literature indicates removal efficiencies are low with
extracellular toxins. Some unsatisfactory results reported with lysis of entire cells may
have been due to an excessive time delay between flocculation and analysis. In
summary, currently available results indicate that conventional coagulation and rapid
filtration processes assist in toxin removal, particularly if cyanobacterial cells are kept
intact, but cannot be generally relied upon as the main removal process. Mouchet and
Bonnélye (1998) have emphasised the need for:
"... pilot scale investigation in order to estimate the technical and economical advantages
of this choice in each case. Generally, a conventional treatment line, including
coagulation, flocculation, settling or flotation, and filtration, is preferred to treat algae-rich
waters. However, algae removal is somewhat more delicate than turbidity removal and,
consequently, greater attention is required when selecting technology and adjusting the
chemical treatment." (Mouchet and Bonnélye, 1998)
9.3.8 Slow sand filtration
In contrast to rapid filtration, slow sand filters operate at lower rates and develop a
surface filter cake which performs most of the filtration together with (often high)
biological treatment activity. These biofilms establish after some time of operation and
contribute significantly to degradation of dissolved substances. Mouchet and Bonnélye
(1998) reported a likely removal of 99 per cent of algal cells by slow sand filtration.
Operation of these filters in the dark can prevent intensive algal growth on the filter.
However, overloading of filters with algae or cyanobacteria from the raw water may lead
to rapid blocking, requiring removal of the bioactive surface layer, thus temporarily
reducing the efficiency for retention of dissolved substances. For removal of toxic
cyanobacteria, this constitutes a dilemma because bloom-containing waters are likely to
lead to rapid blocking and thus undermine the practicability of slow sand filtration.
However, experiments have shown that before blocking, slow sand filters may be quite
effective in the removal of toxic cyanobacteria and dissolved toxins.
Keijola et al. (1988) evaluated laboratory-scale slow sand filters and reported over 80
per cent removal of toxins from Microcystis, 30-65 per cent removal of toxins from
Planktothrix (syn. Oscillatoria) and about 70 per cent removal of anatoxin-a. Because
filtration itself would not be expected to achieve any removal of extracellular toxin, these
results suggest that the mechanisms were at least biosorption, and perhaps some
biotransformation. Australian studies (Sherman et al., 1995) with roughing filters followed
by slow sand filters showed that M. aeruginosa and some Planktothrix (syn. Oscillatoria)
cells from toxic bloom material could be removed by physical means and biological
processes. Superior microcystin removal, in one of two river water sources being treated
with GAC filters, was attributed to biological activity (Drikas, 1994). Freeze dried bloom
material was used in this study.
Work on microcystin-LR degradation using an isolated bacterium for use in water
treatment has been undertaken by Bourne et al. (1996). A pseudo-monad has been
isolated which possesses an enzyme system capable of degrading microcystin, but the
work is currently only at the laboratory scale. Pilot plant studies using a solid phase
support for this bacterium to investigate this process are to be undertaken.
Developments have occurred in the exploitation of slow sand filters at large treatment
works, notably in the UK and Netherlands. These have included use of various
pretreatments, such as conventional treatment by coagulation and filtration and pre-
ozonation to control the rate of blocking by algae and cyanobacteria. Whilst these
processes will assist with removal of cells containing toxins, they have not been
adequately assessed for their reliability in degradation of extracellular toxins. A notable
development has been the sandwiching of a layer of GAC within the bed of sand in slow
sand filters in order to assist in removal of dissolved toxins.
General experience with slow sand filters suggests that they are potentially very useful
for removal of particles and dissolved substances, particularly if further developed or
combined with other treatment steps to avoid blocking when loaded with waters rich in
algae and cyanobacteria (or other particles). New approaches to slow sand filtration are
experimenting with horizontal rather than vertical water flow (as used in cross-flow
membrane techniques). This requires larger amounts of water but will remove most of
the potentially filter-blocking particles and, in particular, would keep cyanobacteria
suspended. Such systems may be developed locally, particularly to serve small
communities. For large treatment facilities, bulk cell removal by coagulation and
clarification before slow sand filtration may be an effective approach for obtaining the
benefits while avoiding rapid blocking.
9.3.9 Activated carbon adsorption
The use of activated carbon adsorption has expanded greatly in Europe and North
America during the past two to three decades because most other water treatment
processes are ineffective in removing soluble organic matter. This approach uses either
powdered activated carbon (PAC) which can be added intermittently whenever the need
arises or GAC adsorbers which are used continuously. Accordingly, GAC may be more
expensive than PAC when used only intermittently, but it is also generally more effective
and more reliable for consistent removal of soluble organic compounds (Hamann et al.,
1990). Given the nature of cyanobacterial toxins, activated carbon adsorption would be
expected to offer some promise for toxin removal.
Powdered activated carbon
Keijola et al. (1988) found that 20 mg l-1 of PAC was able to achieve a 90 per cent
removal of hepatotoxins following conventional treatment combined with pre-ozonation.
Hart and Stott (1993) and Croll and Hart (1996) have reported the evaluation of several
PACs for the removal of microcystin-LR at an initial concentration of 40 µg l-1. With the
most effective PAC tested (wood based), doses greater than 20 mg l-1 were required to
achieve toxin removal of greater than 85 per cent.
Donati et al. (1993) also evaluated several different PACs for the removal of dissolved
microcystin-LR at an initial concentration of 50 µg l-1. For the best PAC they studied, a
dose of 25 mg l-1 with 30 minutes contact time was able to achieve 98 per cent removal,
while for the poorest a dose of 50 mg l-1 only achieved a 60 per cent removal. They
suggested that the mesopore volume of the various carbons was the best predictor of
carbon performance (Donati et al., 1994a). Nodularin was also removed with PAC
(Donati et al., 1994b). Likewise, Bernazeau (1994) found that 12 mg l-1 of PAC could
achieve a 95 per cent reduction of dissolved microcystin-LR from an initial concentration
of 50 µg l-1. Monitoring of a full scale conventional water treatment plant which was using
a PAC dose of 30 mg l-1 showed the combined treatment processes removed an average
of 82 per cent when microcystin levels in raw water were above 0.5 µg l-1 (Lambert et al.,
1996).
There is general agreement that to achieve high removal efficiencies, very high doses of
PAC are required for toxin removal and that contact time is very important. Lower doses
of PAC are required with pure water compared with natural water containing organic
matter and when using actual plant mixing conditions and contact times. Alum
coagulation in conjunction with PAC was also found to affect adversely toxin removal
(Jones et al., 1993).
Granular activated carbon
As might be expected, research into the performance of GAC has shown effective
removal of toxins, provided the adsorption capacity of the GAC has not been
compromised. Pilot scale tests treating microcystins at 30-50 µg l-1 showed greater than
90 per cent toxin removal for water treatment volumes up to 7,000-10,000 activated
carbon bed volumes before efficiency dropped to less than 63 per cent (probably
because of saturation of the GAC with dissolved organic carbon (DOC)) (Bernezeau,
1994). In these trials, the raw water had DOC levels at 5-6.5 mg l-1, more than 100-fold
greater concentration than the microcystins. The DOC: toxin ratio would be at least this
high under any realistic bloom conditions.
Studies by Hart and Stott (1993), using rapid column tests to simulate the performance
of GAC under dynamic conditions predicted bedlives to be fairly short for continuous
exposure to microcystin concentrations of 5-20 µg l-1. For example, Figure 9.3 shows
predicted bedlife for four different carbons, based on rapid column tests. The bedlife is
the time taken to reach 1 µg l-1 in the treated water with a constant concentration of 10
µg l-1 in the feed water, for a range of empty bed contact times (EBCTs). For EBCTs
typically used in water treatment of 10-15 minutes, the best performing carbon for this
water gave a bedlife of only 30-45 days. These results were confirmed in Australian
studies by Jones et al. (1993) and Craig and Bailey (1995) in both laboratory and pilot
plant studies, using air dried bloom material. The results showed that while various
GACs were effective for microcystin-LR removal, the life of the GAC was limited.
Saturation conditions probably explain the observations that a full-scale GAC adsorber
was achieving only between 40 and 60 per cent microcystin removal down to 0.6-1.2 µg
l-1 for raw water which typically had DOC levels of 20 mg l-1, 2,000 fold greater than the
toxin levels (Lambert et al., 1996).
Figure 9.3 Predicted GAC bedlives for 10 µg l-1 microcystin-LR input and 1 µg l-1
limit in filtrate from rapid column test results for four different carbons (After
Carlisle, 1994. Reproduced courtesy of the Foundation for Water Research, UK)
No published studies have been found using GAC specifically for removal of nodularin,
cylindrospermopsin or PSP toxins. However, a report by Falconer et al. (1989) showed
removal of Anabaena neurotoxicity on GAC. Given the later identification of the toxin of
the population studied, their study almost certainly assessed PSP toxin removal. Carlile
(1994) repeated the tests by Hart and Stott (1993), using the GAC they found to be most
effective, and found anatoxin-a to be adsorbed better than microcystin-LR.
Biologically active carbon
Granular activated carbon is not only an effective adsorption process but it is also an
effective medium for biological treatment. Because microcystin-LR has been shown to
be biodegradable (Fawell et al., 1993), it is therefore possible that the toxin could be
degraded on a biologically active GAC. Carlile (1994) undertook pilot scale tests using
two GACs, one that had been previously used on a pilot plant for total organic carbon
(TOC) removal and an unused GAC. For the tests, for each GAC, two different contact
times of 7.5 and 15 minutes were used. The pilot plant results showed that there was no
significant difference between the performance of the unused GAC and the used GAC at
both contact times. However, the comparison of pilot plant results with results of
modelling assuming removal only by adsorption, shows poorer removal by adsorption
only (without any biological activity) at both contact times (Figure 9.4). The implications
from this are that the better removal on the pilot plant resulted from biological activity on
the GAC, and that this biological activity developed very quickly also on the unused GAC.
Figure 9.4 Comparison of pilot scale test results for microcystin-LR removal by
used GAC (probably biologically active) with performance predicted from models
for adsorption only (After Hart et al., 1997. Reproduced courtesy of Blackwell
Science)
Pilot plant trials investigating anatoxin-a removal by GAC showed no breakthrough,
whereas modelled results for the same operating conditions predicted breakthrough (UK
WIR, 1995). This suggested that biological activity was also important for anatoxin-a
removal by GAC.
In practice, it is difficult to exclude biological activity from GAC adsorbers and therefore
better removal of both toxins than indicated by rapid column tests would be expected.
The pilot-scale experiments discussed above suggest that when biological activity is
established, GAC at 15 minutes effective bed contact time provides a high degree of
security for both microcystin-LR and anatoxin-a removal. However, as these results
currently are poorly confirmed in full scale application, careful surveillance of treatment
performance is essential for treatment plants removing cyanotoxins in the raw water with
GAC. This particularly pertains to monitoring of breakthrough when saturation with DOC
is approached.
9.4 Chemical oxidation and disinfection
Drinking water is treated with chemical oxidants to fulfil a wide variety of objectives
including: control of biofilm growth, colour removal, odour control, enhancement of
coagulation and flocculation, and iron or manganese oxidation. The most critical
application of chemical oxidants is for disinfection. The chemicals used most commonly
in municipal water treatment are chlorine, chloramines, ozone, chlorine dioxide and
potassium permanganate.
9.4.1 Oxidation combined with disinfection
Once cyanobacterial cells have been removed from water, dissolved cyanotoxins are
potentially susceptible to oxidation by disinfectants. Several substances have been
tested for this purpose in drinking water treatment.
Chlorine
Early work reported that substantial doses (5 mg l-1) of chlorine were ineffective in
destroying toxicity from algal extracts, as measured in mouse bioassays (Hoffman,
1976). Likewise, combined treatment processes which included chlorination at 0.5 mg l-1
were also found ineffective, suggesting little contribution from the chlorination stage
(Keijola et al., 1988; Himberg et al., 1989). Similarly, Lambert et al. (1996) found that
chlorination achieved negligible reduction in microcystin levels of 0.3-0.5 µg l-1 in treated
water. In these studies, chlorine may have been consumed rapidly by the high
concentrations of organic matter reported to be present, leaving insufficient available for
removal of microcystins. However, Nicholson et al. (1994) showed that chlorination could
be very effective at destroying microcystin-LR and nodularin under the correct treatment
conditions, i.e. free chlorine residual of 0.5 mg l-1 after 30 minutes contact time with pH <
8. In contrast, they found that chloramination was completely ineffective at destroying
microcystin-LR and nodularin, and this creates a problem for treating natural waters with
any substantial nitrogenous chlorine demand.
Carlile (1994), Croll and Hart (1996) and Hart et al. (1997) have reported tests with a
variety of oxidants using water spiked with dissolved microcystin-LR or anatoxin-a in the
range 5-10 µg l-1. The tests with chlorine used an applied dose of 1.7 mg l-1, which was
found to give a free residual of approximately 0.7 mg l-1 after 30 minutes. The
effectiveness of the chlorine in reducing microcystin-LR concentration was very
dependent on pH and time. At pH 5, removal was more than 93 per cent within 30
minutes whilst at pH 7 removal reached only 88 per cent after 22 hours. Tests with a
water containing Microcystis cells indicated that chlorination could be similarly effective.
Chlorination during treatment at a pH sufficiently low to show maximum effect might not
be feasible in practice. However, in conjunction with extended contact times with a
residual free chlorine concentration, microcystin is likely to be degraded. Monitoring of
this effect is important.
Chlorination tests have also been undertaken with water containing dissolved anatoxin-a.
Nicholson et al. (1994), as well as Carlile (1994), reported no discernible removal of
anatoxin-a by chlorination. Rositano and Nicholson (1994) also showed that chlorination
of anatoxin-a was ineffective with a dose of 15 mg l-1 at pH 7 for 30 minutes contact time,
providing only a 16 per cent removal. Recent Australian studies (unpublished results)
have shown that removal of cylindrospermopsin can be achieved with chlorine doses of
1-2 mg l-1 at pH levels between 6 and 7.5 and a chlorine residual of 0.5 mg l-1.
Care must be taken with chlorination procedures to avoid occupational exposure to toxic
levels of chlorine in the air, or the formation of excess levels of trihalomethanes.
Ozone
The most consistently efficient process for destruction of both ultra- and extracellular
microcystins appears to be ozonation, which can rapidly achieve essentially complete
destruction of microcystins, nodularin and anatoxin-a (Keijola et al., 1988; Himberg et al.,
1989; Rositano and Nicholson, 1994; Croll and Hart, 1996; Rositano et al., 1996; Hart et
al., 1997). The major consideration in the application of ozonation is the ozone
demanded by background DOC concentrations because, at a DOC level of 8.5 mg l-1,
ozone doses above 1 mg l-1 were necessary to achieve complete microcystin-LR
destruction (Rositano and Nicholson, 1994). The results of Hart et al. (1997)
demonstrate the importance of sufficiently high ozone doses (Figure 9.5). At low doses
up to 0.6 mg l-1, ozone degraded DOC and had little effect on microcystin-LR. Only after
the DOC demand was satisfied, did the ozone show an effect on microcystin-LR.
However, between 0.6 and 1.3 mg l-1, this effect consisted almost entirely of cellular lysis,
and only at 2 mg l-1 was extracellular toxin subsequently converted. These results
highlight the crucial importance of sufficiently high ozone doses as well as of careful
monitoring of performance, particularly with variable DOC concentrations in the water
source as occur during cyanobacterial blooms. As discussed in section 9.4.2, the
performance of ozone may be improved substantially if it is applied in several steps, e.g.
before destabilisation/flocculation as well as after filtration.
Recent work in Australia (unpublished results) has shown that the ozone dose
necessary to achieve removal of a range of PSP toxins in the concentration range 10-
100 µg l-1 was less than the ozone demand of the water. Other recent studies in Australia
(unpublished results) have shown that ozone is also effective for the removal of
cylindrospermopsin.
Figure 9.5 Effect of ozonation on the distribution of both intra- and extracellular
microcystin-LR from Microcystis dosed into a raw lowland water (After Hart et al.,
1997. Reproduced courtesy of Blackwell Science)
Care must be taken with ozone procedures to avoid occupational exposure to toxic
levels in the air.
Potassium permanganate
Potassium permanganate at 1 mg l-1 was found to achieve 95 per cent removal of
microcystin-LR in 30 minutes. However, in the presence of live intact cells removal was
much poorer, suggesting that permanganate was unable to penetrate or lyse the cells
effectively and was therefore unable to come into contact with the toxin (Rositano, 1996).
Hart and Stott (1993), Carlile (1994), Croll and Hart (1996) and WRc (1996) have all
reported similar observations for the removal of dissolved microcystin-LR and anatoxin-a
and the same limitation in treating Microcystis cells. Lam et al. (1995) reported that
potassium permanganate caused some cell lysis and liberation of microcystin-LR. This
finding may be influenced by longer contact times than those used by Rositano (1996).
Hydrogen peroxide and UV radiation
Hydrogen peroxide was found ineffective in toxin removal, whereas either UV alone or
UV with hydrogen peroxide achieved about a 50 per cent removal of microcystin-LR
after 30 minutes (Rositano and Nicholson, 1994).
In contrast, Croll and Hart (1996) and WRc (1996) found UV radiation was capable of
efficiently degrading both microcystin-LR and anatoxin-a, but only at very high doses of
about 20,000 mWs/cm2. A typical water disinfection dose is about 30 mWs/cm2, and
therefore UV on its own cannot be regarded as a practical method of toxin reduction. A
recent finding has shown that very high concentrations of microcystin-LR (50-200 mg l-1)
were rapidly (10-40 minutes) destroyed using UV light in the presence of a titanium
dioxide catalyst (Robertson et al., 1997). The potential applications of this finding in
water treatment remain to be explored.
Chlorine dioxide
Chlorine dioxide has strong oxidising ability, although only limited studies have been
conducted with this oxidant. Hart and Stott (1993) found that whilst a dose of 6 mg l-1 was
required to reduce 4.6 µg l-1 of dissolved microcystin-LR to less than 1 µg l-1, a dose as
great as 10 mg l-1 had no effect on about 4 µg l-1 of intracellular microcystin.
9.4.2 Pre-oxidation (before cell removal)
Pre-oxidation has been widely reported to assist coagulation, especially in the removal
of some algae and cyanobacteria. Oxidants have been shown to breakdown some
cyanotoxins effectively under certain conditions (see section 9.4.1) but may also lead to
cell lysis and toxin release. Thus pre-oxidation of toxic cyanobacteria is a highly critical
issue in treatment design.
Ozone has been most effective in oxidation of cell-bound microcystin, if applied at a
sufficiently high dose and contact time (see section 9.4.1). Dissolved air flotation has
been proposed in which the recycled water is saturated with ozone-rich air (Baron et al.,
1997). Ozone-rich air has also been proposed to be used in dispersed air flotation.
These approaches might result in reduction of extracellular toxin as well as enhanced
removal of cells.
Chlorine has been applied to destroy cell-bound microcystins before further treatment.
However, Lam et al. (1995) showed that chlorination of bloom material using a high dose
of 44 mg l-1, resulted in release of 64 per cent of the intracellular microcystin. Thus, pre-
chlorination of raw waters containing cyanobacterial cells risks the release of toxin from
otherwise intact cells.
Mouchet and Bonnélye (1998) have compared pre-ozonation and pre-chlorination with
respect to their effect in elimination of algae and cyanobacteria, as well as toxin release
and formation of by-products. They concluded that pre-chlorination is slightly more
effective than pre-ozonation in enhancing coagulation (96.9 per cent removal as
compared with 94.1 per cent in one treatment plant in France). However, this advantage
is offset by the problems of cell damage resulting in release of DOC and metabolites
which either may be toxic or may impart offensive taste and odour, as well as leading to
formation of by-products (particularly highly unpleasant chlorophenols). In contrast, for
pre-ozonation (usually dosed at 1 mg l-1) these authors found little, if any, cell lysis at
doses up to 3 mg l-1. They recommend pre-ozonation as the better choice, especially in
conjunction with a main ozonation step further in the treatment line, e.g. between
clarification and filtration. It is however acknowledged that pre-chlorination is still very
common, particularly in developing countries. While the advantages for improving
clarification, keeping filters clean, eliminating ammonia and enhancing post-chlorination
are well established, pre-chlorination in plants without subsequent adsorption onto
activated carbon is not recommended.
Prior to cell removal, the total and dissolved organic carbon load of water with
cyanobacterial blooms will vary by orders of magnitude, and consumption of the oxidant
will therefore also vary widely. Continuous control of the oxidising step and very high
doses may be necessary to ensure complete oxidation of cyanotoxins in one pre-
treatment step. This is likely to be difficult in practice, and is associated with a risk of
toxin liberation. Removing cyanobacterial cells before application of oxidant is safer. In
contrast, pre-oxidation with a low ozone dose may be useful because it substantially
enhances cell removal by subsequent steps. Safe and effective operation is possible if
further cyanotoxin barriers (such as a further ozone step or GAC) are available.
Consequently, pre-oxidation may be regarded as a step for enhancement of cell removal
rather than cyanotoxin degradation, and requires either monitoring for breakthrough of
dissolved toxins during cyanobacterial blooms or for the use of further multiple barriers in
the treatment system.
9.5 Membrane processes and reverse osmosis
Membrane processes, particularly microfiltration (MF) and ultrafiltration (UF) are
increasingly seen, under some circumstances, as economically viable treatment
alternatives to conventional treatment for small and large communities. They should be
effective in the removal of cyanobacteria and intracellular toxins.
Experimental studies at laboratory scale with flat-sheet UF and MF membranes, in both
dead-end and crossflow modes, have shown high efficiency of removal (> 98 per cent) of
whole cells of toxic M. aeruginosa (Chow et al., 1997b). This study also examined the
effect of the filtration process on cell integrity by fluorescence microscopy and assessed
cell damage by measuring the leakage of cell chlorophyll and toxin (microcystin-LR) into
the permeate. There was evidence of damage to a small proportion of cells following
filtration, but no significant increase in toxin in the permeate with all modes of filtration. In
experiments with the ultrafiltration membrane, the amount of microcystin was
significantly lower in the permeate than in the feed, which suggested that the particular
UF membrane employed may have rejection properties or adsorption ability for
microcystin. This would not be expected for UF membranes although removal of soluble
toxin may be achieved with a very low molecular weight cut-off pore size, such as those
offered by nanofiltration membranes. Hart and Stott (1993) evaluated the effect of
nanofiltration for the removal of microcystin spiked into natural water at concentrations
between 5 µg l-1 and 30 µg l-1 and found removal to below 1 µg l-1. Australian studies with
membranes (Muntisov and Trimboli, 1996) also showed that using nanofiltration
microcystin-LR and nodularin at 8 µg l-1 were removed from water from the River Murray
that had been spiked with toxin.
Neumann and Weckesser (1998) have tested three reverse osmosis membranes at 25-
35 bar for elimination of microcystin-LR and microcystin-RR from tap and salt (3,000 mg
l-1 NaCl) water. Initial toxin concentrations in the retentate were in the range 70-130 µg l-1.
With a detection limit of 0.2 µg l-1, average retention levels were 96.7-99.6 per cent.
There was no statistical difference in retention of the microcystins between the two
waters.
9.6 Microcystins other than microcystin-LR
Most of the published research relates to microcystin-LR, even though its concentration
can be exceeded by those of other variants, or by the sum of the concentrations of other
variants (Codd and Bell, 1996).
Computer models are available which can be used to predict the properties of chemical
compounds, based on their chemical structure, in order to provide information in relation
to toxicology and environmental impact. Such models have been used to predict the
properties of the microcystin variants which would be important in relation to removal by
water treatment processes (WRc, 1997).
A physical measure of solubility and interaction with water molecules that gives an
indication of the potential adsorption by activated carbon is the octanol-water partition
coefficient, K . This is defined as the ratio of the concentration in the octanol phase to
ow
the concentration in the water phase in a two-phase octanol-water system at equilibrium,
and is usually expressed as a logarithm. Readily adsorbed, hydrophobic compounds
have high values and poorly adsorbed hydrophilic compound have low values (often
negative, indicating a higher concentration of the compound in the water phase). K
ow
values have been estimated from molecular structure to provide an indication of the
relative hydrophobicity compared with microcystin-LR (for which some information on
activated carbon adsorption is available). The calculated K values suggest that the
ow
majority of variants would be adsorbed by activated carbon similarly to, or better than,
microcystin-LR. Hence any strategy for using activated carbon, based on the data
available for microcystin-LR, would probably be suitable for the majority of the other
microcystins.
Attempts to model the reactivity of microcystin variants with oxidants have been
unsuccessful because of the complexity of the molecular structure. A principal
mechanism of action of oxidants, particularly ozone and chlorine, on organic compounds
is by the breakdown of double bonds. Any modifications to the basic microcystin
structure which increases the degree of double bonding in the molecule would therefore
be expected to enhance its reaction with ozone or chlorine. It has been concluded, from
consideration of the amino acid functional groups in the variants, that some variants
would be expected to be more reactive with oxidants than microcystin-LR, although the
effect may not be important in practical terms because the basic molecular structure is
not changed radically. For the same reason, the other variants would not be expected to
be much less reactive with oxidants than microcystin-LR. Hence, any strategy for oxidant
application based on microcystin-LR data would probably be just as effective for the
other microcystins.
The modelling approach available for biodegradability can only class compounds as
biodegradable or non-biodegradable, and cannot provide any further quantification to the
degree of biodegradability. Modelling has classed microcystin-LR as biodegradable, and
changes to the amino acids have not changed this classification. Hence all the variants
would be expected to show similar biodegradability to microcystin-LR. This would be of
significance in relation to the performance of biological GAC and slow sand filtration
processes.
The lack of experimental data on the elimination of microcystins other than microcystin-
LR emphasises the need to monitor performance of any treatment system that is applied
for cyanotoxin removal.
9.7 Effective drinking water treatment at treatment works
There are a number of messages that arise from the published work with respect to
good practice as well as effective design and operation of water treatment works. These
include:
• Resources and abstraction should be managed to minimise the presence of algal
concentrations in the raw water delivered for treatment.
• Chemical preparation and dosing facilities must be of adequate size, process control
should ensure rapid dispersion and appropriate retention times, and chemical doses
should be optimised at the appropriate pH.
• Some oxidants, e.g. ozone, can be dosed before coagulation and clarification but
require particular care, not only to avoid lysis of cells but also to limit problems with
disinfection by-product formation. Separation of steps into a low pre-oxidation dose to
enhance flocculation and a higher dose after cell removal to oxidise dissolved toxins is a
safer approach.
• Granular activated carbon plants with a high EBCT and ozone-GAC facilities may
remove toxins effectively, especially if the GAC supports substantial biological activity.
• The effectiveness of treatment plants without ozone but with GAC will depend on the
GAC EBCT value, on the degree of biological activity on the GAC, on the extent of
exhaustion of the GAC and of the magnitude and duration of toxin occurrence.
• Conventional treatment plants without ozone and GAC might remove cyanobacterial
cells and dissolved toxins satisfactorily if coagulation, clarification, filtration and
superchlorination-dechlorination (with a contact time of>15 mg min l-1) or ozonation are
carried out effectively.
• Slow sand filter plants remove algal cells effectively, although pre-treatment steps are
generally applied to maximise filter runs and efficiency. Because of the biological activity
in slow sand filters and long contact times, some removal of dissolved toxin should be
expected but this capability is unclear. Slow sand filter plants with pre-ozonation and/or
sand-GAC sandwiching would be expected to be effective for dissolved toxins (although
confirmation of this expectation is needed).
• Frequent monitoring of treatment performance is crucial to ensure safety, particularly
with respect to cyanotoxin removal, because available information on the performance of
different treatment steps is specific to the conditions of the experiments reported, and
performance under other conditions is unclear. Variable and often high loads of DOC
during cyanobacterial blooms may rapidly compromise treatment procedures that were
initially successful.
• Most procedures have been studied for cyanotoxin removal as isolated treatment steps,
rather than as a combination following the multi-barrier principle. Planning of treatment
will lead to best results if combinations are considered, and if cell and dissolved toxin
removal are separately evaluated (e.g. combinations of pre-oxidation to enhance cell
removal with effective post-oxidation to ensure destruction of liberated toxin, or
combinations of cell removal and slow sand filtration).
Perhaps because of the intermittent nature of cyanobacterial blooms, very little
information has been reported from full-scale treatment plants treating water at naturally
occurring toxin levels. Laboratory and pilot-scale investigations have shown that
dissolved toxins can be removed effectively to less than 1 µg l-1 under conditions
normally used in water treatment by biologically active GAC, ozone, potassium
permanganate and chlorine (microcystin only). The information which has been reported
to date is summarised in Table 9.3.
Table 9.3 Summary of water treatment performance on microcystins
Expected removal1
Treatment technique Comments
Cell bound Extracellular
Coagulation/sedimentation/dissolved > 80% <10% Removal only achievable
air flotation for toxins in cells,
provided cells are not
damaged
Precipitation/sedimentation > 90% <10% Removal only achievable
for toxins in cells,
provided cells are not
damaged
Rapid filtration > 60% <10% Removal only achievable
for toxins in cells,
provided cells are not
damaged
Slow sand filtration ~ 99% Probably Removal effective for
significant toxins in cells; efficiency
for dissolved microcystin
is likely to depend on
biofilm formation and thus
on filter run length
Combined > 90% < 10% Removal only achievable
coagulation/sedimentation/filtration for toxins in cells,
provided cells are not
damaged
Dissolved air flotation > 90% Not assessed, Removal only achievable
probably low for toxins in cells,
provided cells are not
damaged
Adsorption - Powdered activated Negligible > 85% For adequate PAC doses
carbon (PAC) (> 20 mg l-1) with a PAC
shown to be effective,
DOC competition will
reduce capacity
Adsorption - Granular activated See rapid > 80% For practical EBCTs, DOC
carbon (GAC) filtration competition will reduce
capacity and hasten
breakthrough, filtration
also removes algal cells
Biological granular activated carbon See rapid > 90% See GAC, biological
filtration activity enhances removal
efficiency and bed life
Pre-ozonation Very effective Potential Useful in low doses to
in enhancing increase assist coagulation of cells;
coagulation risk of toxin release
requires careful
monitoring and possibly
subsequent treatment
steps
Pre-chlorination Very effective Causes lysis Useful to assist
in enhancing and release of coagulation of cells but
coagulation dissolved applicable for toxic
metabolites cyanobacteria only if
subsequent treatment
steps will remove
dissolved toxins and other
released metabolites
Ozonation (post clarification) - > 98% Rapid and efficient on
soluble toxin provided that
DOC demand is satisfied
Free chlorine (postfiltration) - > 80% Effective when free
chlorine is > 0.5 mg I-1
after > 30 minutes at pH <
8 and low DOC; effect
negligible when dose low
or pH > 8
Chloramine - Negligible Ineffective. Free chlorine
application will yield
ineffective chloramines in
waters enriched with
nitrogenous organic
matter
Chlorine dioxide - Negligible Not effective with doses
used in drinking water
treatment
Potassium permanganate - 95% Effective on soluble toxin
but only in absence of
whole cells
Hydrogen peroxide - Negligible Not effective on its own
UV radiation - Negligible Capable of degrading
microcystin-LR and
anatoxin-a, but only at
impractically high doses
Membrane processes Likely to be Uncertain Depends on membrane
very high (> type, further research
99%) required to characterise
performance
DOC Dissolved organic carbon
Source: Adapted from Yoo et al., 1995
1 Likely efficiency of removal when continuously applied at optimal doses and pH and
under proper operating conditions
9.8 Drinking water treatment for households and small
community supplies
Domestic upgrading of piped drinking water supplies has been a recent issue of concern
in some countries. Many central supplies provide excellent quality drinking water and
additional household treatment may actually cause deterioration rather than
improvement. However, domestic treatment may have a role in regions supplied with
poor quality drinking water, or for especially sensitive sub-populations. Furthermore, in
many parts of the world, simple and easily maintained treatment for households and
small communities may improve the quality of water otherwise used for drinking without
any treatment. Boiling water will not remove or degrade cyanotoxins (Chen et al., 1998).
Lawton et al. (1998) tested three different domestic jug filtration units for their capacity to
remove extracellular microcystins (LR, LY, LW and LF) and one unit for removal of intact
cells (Microcystis aeruginosa as single cells, spiral filaments of Anabaena flos-aquae
and straight filaments of Planktothrix (syn. Oscillatoria) agardhii). Treatment in the jug
units is based on activated carbon and ion exchange resins. Whereas approximately 60
per cent of the filamentous cyanobacteria were removed, 90 per cent of the single cells
of Microcystis passed through the filter (removal of large Microcystis colonies was not
tested but may be more effective). Cell morphology was thus considered crucial for
elimination performance. Removal of microcystin variants ranged from 32 to 57 per cent
(using new cartridges) and could be augmented to a cumulative removal of 88 per cent
by three repeated passages of the same water through the filter. On filter cartridges
which have reached the half-life recommended by the manufacturer, performance for
extracellular microcystin-LR dropped for two of the three brands tested, in one case
down to 15 per cent elimination. The study draws attention to the possibility of lysis of
cells retained on the filter. It also highlights the need for further development of domestic
jug filters if they are to be suitable for microcystin removal. In addition, the study
emphasises the need for evaluation of performance of treatment processes in specific
situations, particularly if scaled down for domestic use.
Other approaches for individual households and small communities involve methods of
filtration, activated carbon and oxidation. As for large-scale plants, slow sand filtration
will be effective in removal of cells, and will probably contribute to removal of dissolved
cyanotoxins. Rapid blocking can be avoided by pre-treatment to control turbidity or by
management of flow regime. Bankside filtration could also be effective and applicable to
small community supplies. Addition of chlorine to filtered water at a dose high enough to
oxidise microcystins has already been discussed with respect to the benefits for
microcystin removal in relation to the problems of by-product production at high DOC
levels.
Household treatment approaches have the problem of assessment of performance and
quality control. Furthermore, they may enhance social differences, if they are available
only to those who can afford them rather than providing "health for all".
9.9 References
Baron J., Ionesco, N.M. and Bacquet, G. 1997 Combining flotation and ozonation the
Flottazone process. In: Dissolved Air Flotation. Proceedings of an International
Conference, London, Chartered Institution of Water and Environment Management,
London.
Bernezeau, F. 1994 Can microcystins enter drinking water distribution systems, In: D.A.
Steffensen and B.C. Nicholson [Eds] Toxic Cyanobacteria, Current Status of Research
and Management. Proceedings of an International Workshop, Adelaide, Australia,
American Water Works Association Research Foundation, Australian Centre for Water
Quality Research, Centre for Water Research, Belgium, 115-118.
Bernhardt, H and Clasen, J. 1991 Flocculation of micro-organisms, J. Water SRT Aqua.
40(22), 76-87.
Bourke, A.T.C., Hawes, R.B., Neilson, A. and Stallman, N.D. 1983 An outbreak of
hepato-enteritis (the Palm Island Mystery Disease) possibly caused by algal intoxication.
Toxicon, 3, Supplement, 45-48.
Bourne, D.G., Jones, G.J., Blakeley, R.L., Jones, A., Negri, A.P. and Riddles, P. 1996
Enzymatic pathway for the bacterial degradation of the cyanobacterial cyclic peptide
toxin, microcystin-LR. App. Environ. Microbiol., 62, 4086-4094.
Burch, M.D., Velzeboer, R.M.A., Chow, C.W.K., Stevens, H.C., Bee, C.M. and House, J.
1998 Evaluation of Copper Algaecides for the Control of Algae and Cyanobacteria.
Research Report No. 130. Urban Water Research Association of Australia, Melbourne,
Australia.
Carlile, P.R. 1994 Further Studies to Investigate Microcystin-LR and Anatoxin-a
Removal from Water. Report No. 0458, Foundation for Water Research, Marlow, UK.
Casitas Municipal Water District 1987 Current Methodology for the Control of Algae in
Surface Reservoirs. American Water Works Association Research Foundation, Denver.
Chen, G., Chen, C.W., Yu, S.Z., Ueno, Y. 1998 Evaluation of different water treatment to
remove microcystins by using a highly sensitive ELISA. In: M. Miraglia, H. van Egmond,
C. Bera, J. Gibert [Eds] Mycotoxins and Phycotoxins-Developments in Chemistry,
Toxicology and Food Safety.
Chorus I., Klein, G., Fastner, J. and Rotard, W. 1993 Off-flavors in surface waters, how
efficient is bank filtration for their abatement in drinking water? Wat. Sci. Technol., 25/2,
251-258.
Chow, C.W.K., House, J., Velzeboer, R.M.A., Drikas, M., Burch, M.D. and Steffensen
D.A. 1997a The effect of ferric chloride flocculation on cyanobacterial cells. J. Water
SRT Aqua, 46, 324-334.
Chow, C.W.K., Panglisch, S., Mole, J., Drikas, M., Burch, M.D. and Gimbel, R. 1997b A
study of membrane filtration for removal of cyanobacterial cells. AQUA (In Press).
Codd, G.A and Bell, S.G. 1996 The Occurrence and Fate of Blue-green Algal Toxins in
Freshwaters. R&D Report 29, Dundee University, Her Majesties Stationary Office,
London.
Collins, M.R. 1998 Experiences introducing "new" technology: slow sand filtration.
Lecture and abstract of the NSF International PAHO/WHO first International Symposium
on Safe Drinking Water in Small Systems, Technology, Operation and Economics,
Washington, DC.
Craig, K. and Bailey, D. 1995 Cyanobacterial toxin microcystin 'LR' removal using
activated carbon, Hunter Water Corporation experience. In: Proceedings of the
Australian Water and Wastewater Association 16th Federal Convention, Sydney.
Croll, B and Hart, J. 1996 Algal toxins and customers. Paper presented at the UKWIR-
AWWARF Technology Transfer Conference, Philadelphia.
Dickens, C.W.S. and Graham, P.M. 1995 The rupture of algae during abstraction from a
reservoir and the effects on water quality. J. Water SRT, 44(1), 29-37.
Donati, C.D., Drikas, M., Hayes, R. and Newcombe, G. 1993 Adsorption of microcystin-
LR by powdered activated carbon. Wat. J. AWWA, 20(3), 25-28.
Donati, C, Drikas, M, Hayes, R and Newcombe, G. 1994a Activated carbon in drinking
water treatment: II Adsorption of nodularin. Poster presented at the 8th International
Conference on Surface and Colloid Science, Adelaide, February, 1994.
Donati, C.D., Drikas, M., Hayes, R. and G. Newcombe. 1994b Microcystin-LR adsorption
by powdered activated carbon. Wat. Res., 28, 1735-1742.
Drikas, M. 1994 Session IV: Control and or Removal of Toxic Cyanobacteria. In: D.A.,
Steffensen and B.C. Nicholson [Eds] Toxic Cyanobacteria, Current Status of Research
and Management. Proceedings of International Workshop, Adelaide, Australia. American
Water Works Association Research Foundation, Australian Centre for Water Quality
Research, Centre for Water Research, Belgium.
Drikas, M., Chow, C.W.K., House, J. and Burch, M.D. 1997 A pilot study of the removal
of intact cyanobacterial cells. J. AWWA (In Preparation).
Effler, S.W., Linen, S., Field, S.D., Tong-Ngork, T., Hale, F., Meyer, M., and Quirk, M.
1980 Whole lake responses to low level copper sulphate treatment. Wat. Res. 14, 1489-
1499.
Elder, J.F. and Home, A.J. 1978 Copper cycles and CuSO algicidal capacity in two
4
California lakes. Environ. Manage. 2, 17-30.
Falconer, I.R., Runnegar, M., Buckley, T., Huyn, V. and P. Bradshaw, 1989 Using
activated carbon to remove toxicity from drinking water containing cyanobacterial blooms.
J. Am. Water Works Assoc., 81(2), 102-105.
Fawell, J.K., Hart, J, James, H.A. and Parr. W. 1993 Blue-green algae and their toxins
analysis, toxicity, treatment and environmental control. Wat. Supply, 11(3/4), 109-121.
Fitzgerald, G.P. 1966 Use of potassium permanganate for control of problem algae. J.
AWWA, 58, 609-614.
Fitzgerald, G.P. and Faust, S.L. 1963 Factors affecting the algicidal and algistatic
properties of copper. Appl. Microbiol., 11, 3345-351.
Florence, T.M. 1982 The speciation of trace elements in waters. Talanta, 29, 345-364.
Gregory, R and Zabel, T.F. 1990 Sedimentation and flotation. In: F. W. Pontius [Ed.]
Water Quality and Treatment, A Handbook of Community Water Supplies. 4th edition.
American Water Works Association, McGraw Hill, Inc., New York, 443-445.
Grohmann, A., Hahn, H.H., Klute, R. [Eds] 1985 Chemical Water and Wastewater
Treatment. Gustav Fischer Verlag, Stuttgart, New York, 311 pp.
Hamann, C.L., McEwen, J.B. and Myers A.G. 1990 Guide to selection of water treatment
processes. In: F. W. Pontius [Ed.] Water Quality and Treatment - A Handbook of
Community Water Supplies. 4th edition. American Water Works Association, McGraw
Hill Inc., New York, 157-187.
Hanson, M.J. and Stefan, H.G. 1984 Side effects of 58 years of copper sulphate
treatment of the Fairmont Lakes, Minnesota. Wat. Res. Bull., 20, 889-900.
Hart, J. and Stott, P. 1993 Microcystin-LR Removal from Water. Report FR 0367,
Foundation for Water Research, Marlow, UK.
Hart, J, Fawell, J.K and Croll, B. 1997 The fate of both intra and extracellular toxins
during drinking water treatment. Special subject No. 18, SS18-1-6, IWSA World
Congress, Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Himberg, K., Keijola, A.M., Hiisvirta, L., Pyysalo, H. and Sivonen, K. 1989 The effect of
water treatment processes on the removal of Microcystis and Oscillatoria cyanobacteria:
a laboratory study. Wat. Res., 23, 979-984.
Hoffman, J.R. 1976 Removal of Microcystis toxins in water purification processes. Water
SA. 2(2), 58-60.
Hoffman, R.W., Bills, G., and Rae, J. 1982 An in situ comparison of the effectiveness of
four algicides. Wat. Res. Bull., 18, 921-927.
Holden, W.S. 1970 The control of organisms associated with water supplies. In: Water
Treatment and Examination. J.&A. Churchill, London, 453-460.
Humberg, N.E., Colby, S.R., Hill, E.R., Kitchen, L.M., Lym, R.G., McAvoy, W.J. and
Prasad, R. 1989 Herbicide Handbook of the Weed Science Society of America. 6th
edition. Weed Science Society of America, Illinois.
Izaguirre, G. 1992 A copper-tolerant Phormidium species from Lake Matthews,
California, that produced 2-methylisoborneol and geosmin. Wat. Sci. Tech., 25, 217-223.
James, H. and Fawell, J.K. 1991 Detection and Removal of Cyanobacterial Toxins from
Freshwaters. Report No. FR0211 Foundation for Water Research, Marlow, UK.
Jones, G., Minatol, W., Craig, K. and Naylor, R. 1993 Removal of low level
cyanobacterial peptide toxins from drinking water using powdered and granular activated
carbon and chlorination. Result of laboratory and pilot plant studies. In: Proceedings of
the Australian Water and Wastewater Association 15th Federal Convention, Gold Coast,
Australia.
Jones, G. and Orr, P.T. 1994 Release and degradation of microcystin following algicide
treatment of a Microcystis aeruginosa bloom in a recreational lake, as determined by
HPLC and protein phosphatase inhibition assay. Wat. Res., 28(4), 871-876.
Keijola, A.M., Himberg, K., Esala, A.L., Sivonen, K. and L. Hiisvirta, 1988 Removal of
cyanobacterial toxins in water treatment processes: laboratory and pilot-scale
experiments. Tox. Assess., 3, 643-656.
Kenefick, S.L., Hrudey, S.E., Peterson, H.G. and E.E. Prepas, 1993 Toxin release from
Microcystis aeruginosa after chemical treatment. Wat. Sci. Tech., 27(3-4), 433-440.
Lahti, K., Kilponen, J., Kivimäki, A.-L., Erkomaa, K. and Sivonen, K. 1996 Removal of
cyanobacteria and their hepatotoxins from raw water in soil and sediment columns. In:
A.-L. Kivimäki and T. Suokko [Eds] Artificial Recharge of Groundwater. NHP/Report No.
38, Helsinki, 187-195.
Lam, A., Prepas, E., Spink, D. and Hrudey, S.E. 1995 Control of hepatotoxic
phytoplankton blooms; implications for human health. Water Res. 29, 1845-1854.
Lambert, T.W., Holmes, C.F. and Hrudey, S.E. 1996 Adsorption of microcystin-LR by
activated carbon in full scale water treatment. Wat. Res. 30,1411-1422.
Laszlo, F. 1984 Potential release of pollutants in riverbank filtration systems along the
River Danube, Hungary. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on
Interactions Between Sediments and Water. CEP Consultants Ltd., Edinburgh, 264-267.
Lawton, L.A., Cornish, B.J.P.A. and MacDonald, A.W.R. 1998 Removal of
cyanobacterial toxins (microcystins) and cyanobacterial cells from drinking water using
domestic water filters. Wat. Res. 32, 633-638.
Lepistö, L., Lahti, K., Niemi, J. and Färdig. M. 1994 Removal of cyanobacteria and other
phytoplankton in four Finnish waterworks. Arch. Hydrobiol. Algological Studies, 75, 167-
181.
Leuschner, C. 1984 Auswirkungen der Phosphateliminierungsanlage Beelitzhof auf die
qualitative und quantitative Zusammensetzung der Phytoplanktonpopulation im
Wannseewasser bei der Überleitung in den Schlachtensee. Report for the Institute of
Water, Air and Soil Hygiene, Federal Environmental Agency, Berlin, 62 pp.
Mackenthun, K.M. and Cooley, H.L. 1950 The biological effect of copper sulphate
treatment on lake ecology. Trans. Wisconsin Acad. Sci. Arts Lett., 40, 177-187.
Markham. L, Porter, M. and Schofield, T. 1997 Algal and zooplankton removal by
dissolved air flotation at Severn Trent Ltd. surface water treatment works. In: Dissolved
Air Flotation. Proceedings of an International Conference, Charted Institution of Water
and Environmental Management, London.
McGuire, M.J. and Gaston, J.M. 1988 Overview of technology for controlling off-flavours
in drinking water. Wat. Sci. Tech., 20(8/9), 215-228.
McKnight, D. 1981 Chemical and biological processes controlling the response of a
freshwater ecosystem to copper stress: a field study of the CuSO treatment of Mill Pond
4
Reservoir, Burlington, Massachusetts. Limnol. Oceanogr., 26, 518-531.
McKnight, D.M., Chisholm, S.W., and Harleman, D.R.F. 1983 CuSO treatment of
4
nuisance algal blooms in drinking water reservoirs. Environ. Manage., 7, 311-320.
Mole J., Chow, C., Drikas, M., Burch, M. 1997 The influence of culture media on growth
and toxin production of the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa Kütz Emend Elenkin.
Paper presented at the 13th Annual Conference of the Australian Society for Phycology
and Aquatic Botany, Hobart, January 1997.
Moore, G.T. and Kellerman, K.F. 1905 Copper as an algicide and disinfectant in water
supplies. Bull. Bureau Plant. Indus. USDA, 76, 19-55.
Mouchet P. and Bonnélye V. 1998 Solving algae problems: French expertise and world-
wide applications. J. Water SRT, Aqua., 47, 125-141.
Muntisov, M. and Trimboli, P. 1996 Removal of algal toxins using membrane technology.
Water, 23(3), 34.
National Rivers Authority 1990 Toxic Blue-Green Algae. Water Quality Series No. 2.,
National Rivers Authority, London, 128 pp.
Neumann, U. and Weckesser, J. 1998 Elimination of microcystin peptide toxins from
water by reverse osmosis. Environ. Toxicol. Water Qual., 13.
Nicholson, B.C., Rositano, J. and Burch, M.D. 1994 Destruction of cyanobacterial
peptide hepatotoxins by chlorine and chloramine. Wat. Res. 28,1297-1303.
Palmer, C.M. 1962 Control of algae. In: Algae in Water Supplies. An Illustrated Manual
on the Identification, Significance, and Control of Algae in Water Supplies. U.S.
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare Public Health Service, Washington D.C.,
63-66.
Prepas, E.E. and Murphy, T.P. 1988 Sediment-water interactions in farm dugouts
previously treated with copper sulphate. Lake Reserv. Manage., 4, 161-168.
Raman, R.K. 1985 Controlling algae in water supply impoundments. J. AWWA, August,
41-43.
Raman, R.K. 1988 Integration of laboratory and field monitoring of copper sulphate
applications to water supply impoundments. In: Advances in Water Analysis and
Treatment. AWWA Technology Conference Proceedings, St. Louis, Missouri, 203-224.
Robertson, P.K., Lawton, L.J., Munch, B. and Rouzade, J. 1997 Destruction of
cyanobacterial toxins by semiconductor photocatalysis. Chem. Commun., Issue No. 4,
393-394.
Rositano J. 1996 The Destruction of Cyanobacterial Peptide Toxins by Oxidants used in
Water Treatment. Report 110, Urban Water Research Association of Australia.
Rositano, J. and Nicholson, B.C. 1994 Water Treatment Techniques for Removal of
Cyanobacterial Toxins from Water. Australian Centre for Water Quality Research.
Salisbury, South Australia, 55 pp.
Rositano, J., Nicholson, B.C. and Pieronne, P. 1996 Destruction of cyanobacterial toxins
by ozone. In: Proceedings of the First Australasian Conference of the International
Ozone Association, Sydney, Australia.
Sanchez, I. and Lee, G.F. 1978 Environmental chemistry of copper in Lake Monona,
Wisconsin. Wat. Res., 12, 899-903.
Sawyer, C.N. 1962 Causes, effects and control of aquatic growths. J. Wat. Pollut.
Control Fed., 34, 279-288.
Sherman, P., Tully, I. and Gibson, H. 1995 Removal of cyanobacterial cells and toxins
from drinking water with biologically active filters. In: Proceedings of the Australian Water
and Wastewater Association 16th Federal Convention, Sydney.
Steffensen, D.A. and Nicholson, B.C. [Eds] 1994 Toxic Cyanobacteria -Current Status of
Research and Management. Proceedings of an International Workshop, Adelaide,
Australia, American Water Works Association Research Foundation, Australian Centre
for Water Quality Research, Centre for Water Research, Belgium, 172 pp.
UNDP/WHO, 1992 Prediction of Pollution Hazards Affecting Subsurface Drinking Water
Resources, Hungary, Project findings and recommendations. UNDP/HUN/90/001-
WHO/HUN/CWS/010, World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe,
Copenhagen, 33 pp.
UK WIR, 1995 GAC Tests to Evaluate Algal Toxin Removal. Report DW-07/C, UK Water
Industry Research Ltd., London.
Velzeboer, R., Drikas, M., Donati, C., Burch, M. and Steffensen, D. 1995 The removal of
cyanobacterial cells by alum flocculation. In: Proceedings of the Australian Water and
Wastewater Association 16th Federal Convention, Sydney.
Vlaski, A., van Breemen, A.N. and Alaerts, G.J. 1997 Algae laden water treatment by
dissolved air flotation. In: Dissolved Air Flotation. Proceedings of an International
Conference, London, Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management,
London.
WHO 1996 Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality. Volume 2, Health Criteria and other
Supporting Information. World Health Organization, Geneva, 973 pp.
WRc, 1996 The Fate of Intracellular Microcystin-LR During Water Treatment. Report Ref.
96/DW/07/4, UK Water Industry Research Ltd., London.
WRc, 1997 Algal Toxins: Occurrence and Treatability of Anatoxin and Microcystins.
Report 97/DW/07/E, UK Water Industry Research Ltd., London.
Yoo, R.S., Carmichael, W.W., Hoehn, R.C. and Hrudey, S.E. 1995 Cyanobacterial (Blue-
Green Algal) Toxins: A Resource Guide. American Water Works Association Research
Foundation, Denver, 229 pp.
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health consequences,
monitoring and management
Edited by Ingrid Chorus and Jamie Bartram
© 1999 WHO
ISBN 0-419-23930-8
Chapter 10. DESIGN OF MONITORING PROGRAMMES
This chapter was prepared by Geoffrey A. Codd, Ingrid Chorus and Mike Burch
Cyanobacterial blooms and cyanotoxins present a special challenge to monitoring
programmes because the requirements are different from well-recognised monitoring
designs both for pathogenic bacteria and for toxic chemicals. Pathogen concentrations
are highest close to sewage outfalls or the inflow of agricultural runoff polluted by
livestock faeces and they are diluted with increasing distance from such sources. In
contrast, cyanobacteria multiply in the open water environment and scum-forming
species are often dramatically concentrated by wind action. Furthermore, formation and
dispersion of scums may change within days or even hours, making assessment of the
associated hazard difficult. Toxic chemicals are dissolved in the water or bound to
sediments. In contrast, at least while the producer cells remain intact, cyanotoxins are
chiefly contained within the cells. Therefore, they may shift position in the water body
with the cells and accumulate to hazardous concentrations. Consequently, monitoring
strategies must encompass cell-bound toxins in addition to extracellular toxin pools.
Cyanobacterial distributions and their changes in space and time depend on the
morphological, hydrological, meteorological and geographic characteristics of a given
water body. Because the distribution of cyanobacteria is central to hazard assessment,
the design of monitoring programmes should be specifically tailored for each water body
to optimise the relation of information output to work input. Monitoring approaches also
need to be more flexible than for many other parameters. Local knowledge of bloom
history and a good understanding of the local growth conditions for cyanobacteria will
greatly enhance the capacity to anticipate bloom formation. As knowledge and
understanding of a given water body accumulate, regular patterns of Cyanobacterial
growth may be noticed, so that in the long-term, monitoring may be focused upon critical
periods and locations. To ensure efficiency of Cyanobacterial monitoring programmes,
they should be reviewed regularly to provide the most cost effective use of resources
and in order to continue to satisfy the primary needs for which they were established.
Rapid evaluation and interpretation of results is important in order to achieve feedback
into ongoing programmes and their adaptation to current needs.
Analytical quality assurance, as well as data analysis, interpretation and presentation are
important aspects of monitoring programmes. These topics are covered in two of the
companion volumes in this series: Water Quality Assessments (Chapman, 1996) and
Water Quality Monitoring (Bartram and Ballance, 1996).
10.1 Approaches to monitoring programme development
10.1.1 Objectives of monitoring programmes
The objectives of a monitoring programme determine the approach, the design and the
resources required. The aims and further applications of monitoring programmes
focused on cyanobacterial populations and toxins may include, for example:
• Assessment of health hazards caused by cyanobacteria and their toxins.
• Identification of contaminated areas (e.g. in relation to drinking water intakes and
recreational sites).
• Development of regulations concerning the development and use of recreational sites.
• Public education and information.
• Assessment of the causes of cyanobacterial problems (nutrient concentrations and
other limnological data for understanding cyanobacterial growth).
• Development of a nutrient pollution control programme.
• Checking whether compliance with cyanobacterial cell (or biomass) and toxin level
standards for the respective water use is being achieved.
• Prediction of levels and changes in cyanobacterial populations and toxins resulting
from natural phenomena and human influence.
• Information of the effect of interventions, including lake and reservoir management and
water treatment methods, on cyanobacterial cell and toxin levels.
• Wider contribution to the knowledge of cyanobacterial ecology, hydrobiology and the
state of the environment.
The approach to monitoring programme development will differ for each of these aims.
These examples would each require a programme with combinations of monitoring for
cyanobacterial cells, cyanotoxins and growth conditions. Frequently, cyanobacterial
monitoring will be connected to, or included in, other general purpose water quality
monitoring programmes.
10.1.2 Monitoring strategies
Monitoring water bodies can be facilitated by using a structured approach which may
significantly enhance efficiency of laboratory resource use, especially where resources
are limited (see Figure 10.1). Because many commonly occurring cyanobacteria are
more often toxic than non-toxic, the simplest approach is to assume toxicity and to
monitor cyanobacteria rather than their toxins in the water body. Such an approach
begins with simple visual inspection. If this indicates a possible cyanobacterial problem,
the approach moves on to assessing which level of cyanobacterial development can be
sustained by the nutrient concentrations available (i.e. the carrying capacity, which is
most frequently determined by total phosphorus, see section 8.1.) If nutrient
concentrations are high enough for cyanobacterial proliferation to be likely,
cyanobacteria must be monitored at time intervals adequate to identify hazards (see
section 7.5 for time intervals of monitoring).
Monitoring may be supplemented with valuable information by collection of historical
data on bloom occurrence and of health information, including veterinary records of
animal poisonings (see Chapter 6).
10.1.3 Variable selection
Easy-to-assess visual indicators (Step 1 in Figure 10.1) may provide valuable
information concerning cyanobacterial proliferation at low cost and often enable a high
frequency of observation, especially if they are periodically supported by microscopy in
order to ascertain that observed phenomena are due to cyanobacteria. If performed by
local staff with alert and flexible observation skills as well as increasing experience,
regular site inspection (including monitoring and recording of transparency,
discolouration and scum formation) can provide much information in relation to the effort
required. Including an assessment of land-based pollution in critical areas of the
catchment may also provide information on nutrient pollution sources.
Monitoring of variables which enhance cyanobacterial growth and/or accumulation is
valuable in recognising which water resources are at risk of bloom development and
scum formation. In many regions, this may also assist substantially in ruling out
resources unlikely to sustain major cyanobacterial populations. Monitoring of total
phosphorus as a key factor for mass developments may be particularly relevant for
setting priorities in monitoring recreational waters where short-lived minor surface scums
are less of a problem. Total phosphorus data can further provide the basis for planning
and assessing the success of measures to counter the causes of the problem (see
Chapter 8). The collection of further environmental data on hydrological conditions (such
as retention times and thermal stratification), light availability (as assessed by the
relation of depth of light penetration to mixed depth, see section 2.2) as well as dissolved
nitrogen (nitrate and ammonia) provides a basis for understanding why certain
cyanobacterial genera or species dominate.
Figure 10.1 Example of structured, quantitative investigation approach to
monitoring and surveillance for toxic cyanobacteria and their growth potential
Box 10.1 Limitations of assessing toxin risk from monitoring cyanobacterial populations
Although cyanobacterial identification and quantification provide a basis for estimating the toxic
risk, the monitoring of cyanobacterial populations alone cannot be used as a surrogate for
monitoring cyanobacterial toxins because:
• Toxin types and levels per unit cyanobacterial biomass can vary widely, ranging from
undetectable to present at acutely toxic levels.
• Toxin levels per cell vary widely between individual strains and blooms of the same species.
• Individual cyanobacterial strains of the same species can contain more than one type of toxin.
• The toxins can persist in water bodies and water treatment plants in extracellular (soluble) form
after release from the producer-cells upon cell lysis caused by biological, physical or chemical
agents.
It thus follows that cyanobacterial toxins can be present in a waterbody or treatment facility in the
absence of intact cyanobacterial cells or cell debris if the waterbody had recently contained
cyanobacterial cells.
Monitoring cyanobacterial taxa and population densities (cell numbers or biomass) can
provide an excellent basis for assessing risk, particularly if supported periodically with
toxicity tests or toxin analysis. If data on toxin content of prevalent cyanobacteria are
available for specific water bodies or regions, and have been found to remain fairly
constant for the predominant taxa, a tentative prediction of toxin risks can be inferred
from quantitative assessments of cyanobacterial taxa present using samples taken
between the occasions of toxin analysis (see Box 10.1 for the limitations of this
approach). Microscopy may also be used for monitoring finished drinking water prior to
distribution, as well as different treatment steps, for breakthrough of potentially toxic
cyanobacterial cells. The necessary laboratory equipment for monitoring cyanobacteria
is limited to a microscope and some accessories (see Chapter 12). The training
requirements for staff are lower than is frequently assumed (see Box 10.2).
In situations where the phytoplankton is largely dominated by cyanobacteria (e.g. they
constitute more than half of the biomass seen through a microscope), measurement of
the concentration of chlorophyll a can be used as an estimate of cyanobacteria present
(see Chapter 12). A simple photometer is adequate for this approach.
Monitoring for cyanobacterial taxa, cell numbers and/or biomass may provide data which
are of value for a variety of assessments, including:
• The occurrence, types, distribution and abundance of cyanobacteria, including
potential toxin-forming types, in natural and controlled water bodies, water treatment and
distribution systems and in potable water supplies.
• Spatial and temporal changes in cell populations, their composition, abundance and
integrity.
• Relations between cyanobacterial populations and the types and levels of
cyanobacterial toxins (if accompanied by toxin analysis), and associated water quality
problems and health incidents.
• Warning systems to trigger contingency action plans in the event of cyanobacterial
mass development in waters required for human or animal use.
• Responses of water bodies and water supplies to eutrophication control and strategies
to destroy and/or remove cyanobacterial cells in water treatment.
Box 10.2 Adequate training for identifying important cyanobacterial taxa
A common misunderstanding is the assumption that the sophisticated taxonomic training, on a
level adequate for ecological research, is necessary for practical monitoring of cyanobacterial
hazards. This may be intimidating for beginners and practitioners. In practice, it may only be
necessary to focus training on determining the taxa relevant in the region or waterbody to be
monitored, frequently only to the level of genera (e.g. Microcystis), and down to the level of
species only if these are easy to identify and if species differentiation is particularly important for
indication of toxin content (e.g. Planktothrix agardhii and Planktothrix rubescens). Basic
identification of cyanobacteria by local personnel should be supplemented by periodic quality
control by experts (see the Alert Levels Framework Level 2 in section 6.3.3) to ensure adequate
recognition of the important groups, especially after conditions in a water resource have been
changed and other taxa may have proliferated.
Monitoring cyanotoxin concentrations and/or assessment of toxicity may be warranted to
characterise the hazard presented by a given cyanobacterial population. The role of
such monitoring is different in hazard assessment for drinking water and for recreational
water use.
The increasing evidence of health outcomes due to unknown irritative cyanobacterial
components may discourage the use of recreational sites with high cyanobacterial
population densities for water contact-intensive activities, regardless of the
concentrations of known toxins (e.g. microcystins, neurotoxins, cylindrospermopsin).
Analysis of these toxins will not characterise the hazard of irritative effects (see section
5.2.2). However, monitoring of microcystins or other known toxins can assess whether
specific blooms present hazards from the cyanotoxins which are of greater concern for
public health. In particular, it may identify some blooms as not presenting high risk levels.
This information may be particularly relevant for heavily used sites, such as those
associated with holiday facilities and for which temporary closure might have a
substantial economic and social impact.
Monitoring of recreational sites should emphasise bloom prevalence and the potential of
bloom formation. Step 1 of the structured approach presented in Figure 10.1 is
particularly important here. This approach can easily be communicated to the general
public and to bathing site users, and can involve them in assisting with hazard
assessment (in addition to providing a basis for their own decision-making on water
contact activities) by encouraging reporting of scums or strong discolouration and
turbidity to authorities.
Monitoring toxin concentrations is especially important in drinking water supply systems
in order to detect toxins released from the cells into the water during treatment and to
determine the level of risk associated with a specific bloom in the water resource.
Monitoring for cyanobacterial toxins is necessary to provide data:
• On the occurrence, types, abundance and distribution of cyanobacterial toxins in
aquatic environments, water treatment and distribution systems, potable supplies and
food products which contain, or have been exposed to, cyanobacteria and their toxins.
• On relations between environmental conditions, cyanobacterial populations and
cyanobacterial toxins.
• For use in alert levels schemes and in the activation of contingency action plans.
• On relations between cyanobacterial toxins and water quality and health, with
reference to human and animal exposure levels and health effects.
• For the derivation of standards for drinking water quality, to enable compliance with
these values to be achieved and to determine, in the longer-term, whether such
standards remain appropriate or need to be changed.
10.2 Laboratory capacities and staff training
Monitoring for cyanobacterial health hazards makes a range of demands upon analytical
resources, some of which are different from those required by water quality monitoring
for other types of variables. An overview of the requirements for the monitoring
approaches discussed in section 10.1 and their respective information return is given in
Table 10.1. Proper interpretation of information concerning cyanobacteria and their
toxins requires expertise from the health and water resource sectors. However, these
areas of expertise occur within a single authority in a few countries. Multisectoral co-
operation is therefore important. Planning of monitoring programmes should generally
involve co-operation between the environmental and the health sectors, bringing in
further agencies or organisations where appropriate (e.g. drinking-water suppliers and
authorities responsible for tourism, for public education or for water management).
Table 10.1 Approaches to monitoring for cyanobacteria and analysis for cyanotoxins:
requirements and options for their organisation
Monitoring Demands on
Parameters/variables Who Where
type equipment and skills
Basic Minimal
Site inspection Transparency, Secchi disc, regular site Environmental or Local
for indicators of discolouration, scum inspection by trained health officers,
toxic formation, detached mat staff; skill requirement trained health
cyanobacteria accumulation basic, training easily staff or
in waterbody provided supervised local
Background Low to moderate
Potential for Total phosphorus, nitrate Photometer, boat, depth Environmental Local,
cyanotoxin and ammonia, flow sampler, Secchi disc, officers or regional
problems in regime, thermal submersible experts with
waterbody stratification, transparency temperature/oxygen limnological
probe; skills basic but expertise
require specific training
and supervision
Cyanobacteria Low to moderate
In waterbody Dominant taxa (quantity): Microscope, photometer Environmental or Local,
and drinking often determination to is useful; specific health officers regional
water genus level only is training and supervision (with occasional
sufficiently precise; is required, but quite quality control by
quantification only as easily achieved experts);
precise as needed for consultants with
management limnological
expertise
Toxicity Moderate
assessment
In waterbody Toxicity Demands on equipment Toxicologists Central
and drinking are low, but rather high
water on skills
Toxin Moderate to high
concentration
In waterbody Toxin concentration New methods with lower Skilled analysts Central
and drinking financial demands
water presently in
development for some
cyanotoxins (e.g.
immuno-assay); skill
requirements vary
widely from moderate to
very high
Monitoring for visual indicators of cyanobacteria focuses on critical site inspection and
requires almost no facilities. Training of staff is necessary, but not difficult and
experience leads to improved performance. However, much time in the field is required
and this can be reduced substantially by involving local people who have been given
specific training for visual inspection. Nevertheless, professional staff should exercise
periodic quality control over their work.
Environmental monitoring of chemical and physical variables indicating bloom-forming
potential, such as nutrient concentrations, hydrophysical conditions and transparency,
make limited demands upon analytical resources (a submersible temperature and
oxygen probe and a photometer with optical filters to provide the necessary wavelengths
are the most complicated instruments required). Such analytical capacities may be
readily decentralised. While laboratory analysis can be carried out by any capable
chemical laboratory, some limnological expertise is necessary for the planning of field
work, quality control of data and interpretation of results. The staff time required can be
reduced once seasonal patterns of variation are known and sampling regimes can be
adjusted to be most effective.
Health authority staff with experience in microscopy can learn to recognise the most
important toxin-producing cyanobacteria in the water bodies under their responsibility, if
training by experts can be provided (attention may need to be given to dampening the
general taxonomic enthusiasm of some experts, in order to concentrate on the skills
really needed for monitoring the cyanobacterial taxa relevant for the water resources in
question, see Box 10.2). Cyanobacterial identification and quantification can be
centralised or subcontracted because preserved samples can readily be transported
(see Chapter 11). However, the development of local skills is recommended because
this should enable more rapid identification of, and response to, current cyanobacterial
problems.
Cyanotoxin analysis with customised immuno- or enzyme assays, or toxicity tests with
simple bioassays (see Chapter 13), may make only moderate demands on equipment
and can be performed potentially by local health or environmental authorities. However,
these techniques require specific staff training and periodic quality control by comparing
results with those of more elaborate methods. More advanced programmes addressing
toxicity assessment and toxin analysis require developed analytical capacities and
exacting quality control. Even in countries with extensive advanced analytical facilities it
is unlikely that the demand for toxin analysis would justify establishment of widespread
or local facilities and some form of co-operation on a broader scale of centralisation is
therefore advisable. Methods for cyanobacterial quantification and toxin analysis should
be standardised and a system of official accreditation for analytical laboratories should
be implemented.
Several options may be available for conducting analyses of water samples. The agency
responsible for the monitoring programme may have its own laboratory or laboratories,
the facilities of another agency or of a government ministry may be available, or some or
all of the analytical work may be done under contract by a private laboratory. Some
analytical work may be done in the field using either field kits or a mobile laboratory.
Regardless of the options chosen, the analytical services must be adequate for the
volume of work expected. Furthermore, good communication between those planning
and performing field work and the analytical laboratory is crucial for ensuring appropriate
sample collection, preservation and transportation (see Chapter 11). Periodic quality
control is highly recommended particularly with respect to the handling of samples from
field to final analysis.
10.3 Reactive versus programmed monitoring strategies
Monitoring strategies can be regarded as either reactive or programmed, although these
are not necessarily mutually exclusive. A reactive strategy is needed when an
unexpected cyanobacterial bloom develops and affects, or has the potential to affect,
water supplies, recreational water and human health. It can be triggered by an
unanticipated bloom event, by health impairments reported to authorities and related to
cyanobacterial proliferation, by results of routine visual site inspection, or if routine
analysis in drinking water treatment facilities detects cyanobacteria or toxins in the raw
water intake or in recreational areas. This response strategy can include a range of ad
hoc assessments of cyanobacterial numbers, toxicity assessment and toxin analyses.
Programmed monitoring strategies are being applied increasingly to the investigation of
cyanobacterial population and toxin problems where cyanobacterial problems are
ongoing, occur regularly, are anticipated or have occurred in the past. These structured
programmes can provide additional preventative benefits by warning of necessary
actions before a developing cyanobacterial population presents an operational,
environmental, or health problem, or by triggering the implementation of preventive
measures at the source of the problem (see Chapter 8).
The benefit and information obtained from reactive as well as from programmed
monitoring strategies can be greatly enhanced by ensuring that samples of
cyanobacteria or water from natural or controlled environments are supplemented by
clinical observations and clinical samples in the event of associated human and animal
health incidents. This can be assisted by heightening the awareness of medical
practitioners, public health authorities and veterinarians through training and information
programmes (see section 7.4).
The potential for community involvement in monitoring strategies is high, provided that
adequate information is supplied using leaflets, publicity and educational campaigns
(section 7.4.2). "Algae Watch" programmes, or "scum scouting" to report on the
appearance of blooms and scums. Schools programmes and water sports associations
in Australia, the USA and the UK have provided useful information to monitoring
agencies, as well as having helped to promote community action and joint responsibility
for the causes and cures of cyanobacterial bloom problems.
Programmed monitoring strategies have the potential to detect and anticipate changes in
cyanobacterial populations and potential levels of toxins. Such strategies can thus
provide information to trigger appropriate contingency plans. Alert Levels Framework
(ALF) systems are finding application in some countries; these are systems of
programmed monitoring which incorporate action sequences in the event of warning
thresholds being exceeded. Alert Levels Frameworks may be used for the monitoring of
cyanobacterial populations only, or cyanobacterial populations plus toxins, depending on
monitoring objectives and resources (see section 6.3).
10.4 Sample site selection
The selection of sampling sites is a key factor in determining the value of the data to be
sought from the subsequent sample examination and analysis procedures. Sample site
selection should be tailored to meet the overall aims and objectives of the monitoring
programme (or even a single sampling visit). Thus site selection must consider and take
account of the following:
• The uses made of the water body must be considered (e.g. potable supply, recreation,
animal watering). For recreational use, sampling will include shoreline areas particularly
frequented by visitors and may focus on public bathing sites. It may also include offshore
sites where immersion sports take place. For drinking water resources, sites at or close
to the raw water intake are important, and sampling within a treatment plant might
include sampling at different treatment steps.
• If sampling aims at assessing the total population size of the cyanobacteria and their
scum-forming potential, or the nutrient concentrations which influence the maximum
possible population size, it should cover a central reference site in open, mixed water
(experience may indicate if this can be used as a representative site for the main water
mass). Selection of adequate depths must consider stratification of organisms and
nutrients using depth-differentiating or depth-integrating sampling techniques as
described in Chapter 11.
• Morphometric and hydrophysical characteristics of the water body (e.g. exposure to
wind or thermal stratification) may help identify sites which are prone to scum
accumulation. These factors are likely to influence the development and fate of
cyanobacterial populations and their subsequent location in parts of the water body.
• Current weather conditions, particularly wind direction, which lead to scum
accumulation along certain shorelines may require flexible choices of sites, particularly if
the aim is assessing the highest cyanotoxin concentrations by sampling maximum scum
densities.
• Specific incidents, such as animal deaths or human illness, if these are suspected to
be associated with exposure to cyanobacteria and toxins at a specific location in the
water body concerned.
• The history, if available, of cyanobacterial population development and occurrence of
toxins in the water body, because this information may indicate sites particularly likely to
harbour scums.
• Local logistical resources, accessibility and safety factors (e.g. Secchi transparency
should be measured from a pier or boat, offshore sampling requires access to a boat
and to a site for launching it, and sampling from steep shores or reservoir dams might be
dangerous).
• Potential local sources of nutrient pollution (e.g. inlets or slopes affected by erosion).
For adequate sampling site selection it is of critical importance to consider the location
and potential concentration of cyanobacteria in a water body, as described in Chapter 2
and in section 11.3.2. This site selection should account for accumulations of
cyanobacteria as scums (usually quite unevenly distributed over the area of a water
body), as subsurface maxima at some metres depth, as homogeneous distributions
throughout the mixed strata of the water body, or growing on the sediment surface (from
which they may become detached and driven onshore to present acutely toxic
accumulations). Possible scenarios are shown in Figure 10.2.
The heterogeneous and dynamic nature of many cyanobacterial populations presents
difficult problems for sample site selection. A flexible response to the current situation
when choosing the sampling sites may, at times, be more appropriate than following a
rigid programme. Alternatively, fixed sites always sampled within a broader monitoring
programme may be supplemented with the sampling of sites currently harbouring
cyanobacterial scums.
The horizontal and vertical heterogeneities in cell distribution are compounded by further
variability in cyanobacterial toxin levels and distribution. Although the toxins are largely
retained within the producer-cells during growth, they are released into the water during
cell lysis due to natural agents, some algicides and pressure-induced disruption.
Circumstances therefore arise where cyanobacterial toxins may be present in the
absence of intact cyanobacterial cells. Sampling site selection for dissolved toxins may
thus include locations such as the water close to decaying scums and in water treatment
works and distribution systems, when it is suspected that cyanobacterial breakdown may
have occurred.
Figure 10.2 Some locations of cyanobacteria in thermally stratified lakes or
reservoirs. R, recreational area; AP, water abstraction point; 1, shoreline scum of
planktonic cyanobacteria (often decaying); 2, planktonic cyanobacterial scum on
open water during calm conditions; 3, dispersed cyanobacteria in epilimnion; 4,
planktonic cyanobacteria on sediment; 5, upper mixed layer during autumn
overturn; 6, spring and autumn conditions of complete mixing and in summer in
shallow lakes in windy conditions; 7, scum under ice; 8, subsurface maximum of
planktonic cyanobacteria (not apparent at surface); 9, mats of benthic
cyanobacteria on sediment in shallow water; 10, shoreline accumulation of
detached benthic cyanobacteria (Modified from Lindholm et al., 1989 with
additions)
10.5 Monitoring frequency
Cyanobacteria generally have fairly slow growth rates compared with many other micro-
organisms. This helps to simplify monitoring frequency requirements. For those taxa
which do not form scums but are dispersed in the water, weekly or even two-weekly
monitoring intervals are often sufficient, even during their growing season, in order to
monitor population development and to assess the cyanotoxin hazard. However, the
ability of scum-forming cyanobacteria to change their concentration and position in the
water body within very short time spans of only a few hours poses a specific challenge to
the design of monitoring programmes.
Monitoring frequencies for cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins are suggested in the Alert
Levels Framework given in Chapter 6. For example, monitoring may begin on a
fortnightly or weekly basis and be increased to twice-weekly, or to daily, whilst alert
levels are exceeded, and then be reduced again after values decline below alert levels
and guideline values for cyanobacterial cells and toxins. The same principles should be
applied to the monitoring of recreational waters, whether they are used on a year-round
or seasonal basis (section 5.2.2). If a water body prone to cyanobacterial mass
developments is used for water-contact sports on a seasonal basis, or for a single event,
monitoring should begin not less than two weeks before the start of the season or the
event. As monitoring is continued, frequency may be adjusted to enable decisions to be
made on access to the facility throughout the season, or on whether to proceed with a
special event.
Structured approaches to monitoring (e.g. Figure 10.1) introduce nutrients as a further
variable for analysis. This may improve the information return for effort expended,
particularly if each step in the structure is monitored at an appropriate frequency.
Patterns of investigation may begin with longer time intervals and may be intensified as
cyanobacteria begin to proliferate. As knowledge and understanding of a given
ecosystem and the behaviour of its cyanobacterial populations accumulates, monitoring
frequencies can be optimised to meet the demands of the specific situation. For this
reason involving limnological expertise is particularly important in the planning of
monitoring programmes, in the evaluation of the data, and in periodic reassessment of
the adequacy of ongoing programmes. The following monitoring frequencies are
suggested for the structured approach given in Figure 10.1:
• Visual site inspection may begin at weekly or two-weekly intervals, which can be
increased to weekly or even more frequent intervals once cyanobacteria begin to
proliferate.
• Assessment of the carrying capacity for cyanobacteria in terms of nutrients (phosphate
and in nitrogen-limited systems, possibly also dissolved inorganic nitrogen) may be
undertaken less frequently in many situations. This depends on prevalent nutrient levels
and their rate of change. For example, in some water bodies, total phosphorus
concentrations may show little seasonal change, or they may always be far too high to
limit cyanobacterial biomass. In either case, occasional monitoring (in temperate
climates once in spring and once in summer) may be sufficient. On the contrary, if the
hydrological regime shows pronounced fluctuations, or if the total phosphorus
concentration oscillates around levels critical for limiting cyanobacterial biomass (0.03-
0.05 mg l-1 P), monthly or biweekly measurements may be necessary in order to assess
the carrying capacity for cyanobacteria. Often it will be advisable to begin a programme
with monthly sampling for one or two years. Evaluation of patterns may then enable a
reduction of sampling frequency to be justified.
• Assessment of cyanobacterial cell numbers or biomass can be affected by the rapid
changes discussed above, particularly if scum-forming taxa prevail. Knowledge of a
water body's carrying capacity for cyanobacteria, of the taxa typically occurring, and of
seasonal time patterns of their occurrence will help anticipate critical situations which
require increased monitoring frequency. If the aim of monitoring is to check compliance
with standards for drinking water or recreational use, and toxin levels in a given water
body are in the borderline range or above, sampling and analysis may be necessary
several times a week. Time patterns of water body use, particularly for recreation, may
be a useful further criterion for determining the time patterns for sampling.
• Toxin analysis may be necessary less frequently than assessment of cyanobacterial
cell numbers or biomass. Although toxicity of populations is variable, it does not appear
to change within a few days. Assessment of toxicity is particularly recommended when
situations in the water body change, e.g. when other taxa appear or if bloom lysis occurs.
Ideally, "real-time" information on the state of the cyanobacterial population and their
toxins is desirable for scum-forming taxa. Some approaches to meeting this demand are
currently being developed. The simplest approach is semiquantitative assessment of
cyanobacterial cell numbers through a microscope. This can be performed within an
hour or less of sampling, provided a microscope is available locally, and can be repeated
frequently during problem phases provided the laboratory is close to the water body
(which is often the case at drinking water supply reservoirs). Continuous automatic
provision of fluorescence data indicating pigment concentrations has become possible
by means of submersible flow-cell fluorescence spectrophotometers or by continuous
water flow through laboratory fluorimeters and cytometers. These procedures are
currently beginning to differentiate successfully between cyanobacteria and other
components of the phytoplankton. Installation of such devices may be especially
attractive for drinking water supply abstraction points, in order to adapt offtake levels to
the current location of cyanobacteria (if offtake depths are flexible), or in order to have
an immediate indication of the need to apply further treatment steps. Another approach
currently investigated for acquisition of real-time data for chlorophyll distribution and
levels, and potentially for cyanobacterial phycobiliprotein pigments in freshwaters, is
remote sensing of the optical properties of the water body by high resolution airborne
scanners (Cracknell et al., 1990; Jupp et al., 1994). However, flight times may be
infrequent and data collection depends on factors beyond human control, e.g. cloud
cover. Nevertheless, the remote sensing of cyanobacterial populations as a contribution
to water body management has excellent potential particularly for the monitoring of scum
locations. Remote sensing may become cost-effective for areas that have to monitor
many recreational sites.
Further aspects to consider in determining monitoring programme frequencies are, as
with site selection (section 10.4), the monitoring programme objectives, water-use,
specific incidents associated with exposure to cyanobacteria and their toxins, historical
evidence of blooms in the water body, local water body and catchment characteristics,
and the wider knowledge of cyanobacterial ecology. Available resources, sampling and
analytical logistics also need to be taken into account, for example, the time needed for
sample transportation, processing and analysis, and for the interpretation and reporting
of results.
Monitoring intervals should be timed to provide information for the following situations:
• To give warnings of developing cyanobacterial populations and toxin levels.
• On the duration of cyanobacterial populations and toxin levels which exceed guideline
values.
• On the decline of cyanobacterial populations and toxins due to natural processes or
the persistence or reduction in cyanobacterial populations and toxin levels due to
intervention, such as eutrophication control and water treatment.
In subtropical and tropical latitudes where appreciable cyanobacterial populations can
occur all year round, it may not be feasible or necessary to maintain high frequency
sampling programmes throughout the year, particularly if the population density is
subject to less change because there is little seasonal change in growth conditions. In
this event, sampling of the natural or untreated water may need to be at less frequent
intervals, e.g. monthly, with laboratory resources being directed towards higher
frequency monitoring of treated drinking water.
10.6 References
Bartram, J. and Ballance, R. [Eds] 1996 Water Quality Monitoring. A Practical Guide to
the Design and Implementation of Freshwater Quality Studies and Monitoring
Programmes. E & FN Spon, London, 383 pp.
Chapman, D. [Ed.] 1996 Water Quality Assessments. A Guide to the Use of Biota,
Sediments and Water in Environmental Monitoring. E & FN Spon, London, 626 pp.
Cracknell, A.P., Wilson, C.C., Omar, D.N., Mort, A. and Codd, G.A. 1990 Toxic algal
blooms in lochs and reservoirs in 1988 and 1989. In: Proceedings of the NERC
Symposium on Airborne Remote Sensing. Natural Environment Research Council,
Swindon, 203-210.
Jupp, D.L.B., Kirk, J.T.O. and Harris, G.P. 1994 Detection, identification and mapping of
cyanobacteria - using remote sensing to measure the optical quality of turbid inland
waters. Aust. J. Mar. Freshwat. Res., 45, 801-828.
Lindholm, T., Eriksson, J.E. and Meriluoto, J.A.O. 1989 Toxic cyanobacteria and water
quality problems - examples from a eutrophic lake on Åland, Southwest Finland. Wat.
Res., 23, 481-486.
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health consequences,
monitoring and management
Edited by Ingrid Chorus and Jamie Bartram
© 1999 WHO
ISBN 0-419-23930-8
Chapter 11. FIELDWORK: SITE INSPECTION AND
SAMPLING
This chapter was prepared by Hems Utkilen, Jutta Fastner and Jamie Bartram
Fieldwork, including site inspection, sample collection and, in most programmes, some
on-site analysis, determines to a large extent the quality of information obtained and
represents a significant proportion of the total cost of a cyanobacteria or cyanotoxin
monitoring programme. A well-designed and implemented fieldwork programme
enhances the quality of the data obtained and may assist greatly in containing overall
costs. The importance of careful programme design has been emphasised in Chapter 10,
together with the need for pilot testing to refine programmes and to assess logistics.
Properly trained field workers are the backbone of effective sampling and inspection
programmes; aspects of their professional development and training are described in
Chapter 7. Inclusion of members of the public as active participants in monitoring
programmes is rapidly gaining acceptance and can contribute significantly to the quantity
and quality of information obtained from a monitoring programme. Special interest
groups (such as non-governmental organisations and user associations) and also
concerned local persons in sensitive or affected areas can provide useful information.
Proper orientation and training, for example in site inspection, in flexible responses to
the results of inspections, and in conducting basic tests such as transparency, can assist
in providing valuable additional data.
Further information concerning planning and performing fieldwork is presented in Water
Quality Monitoring (Bartram and Ballance, 1996), a companion volume in this series.
11.1 Planning for fieldwork
The principal components of effective planning for fieldwork comprise:
• Timing and preparation (in the context of the monitoring programme plan and
information needs for management).
• Prior liaison with the laboratory that will receive and process samples.
• Logistic preparation.
• Local co-ordination as required.
• Prior liaison with other information recipients (local or central).
Preparation of the monitoring programme principally concerns the timing of visits and
careful cataloguing of sampling sites. The timing of sampling and inspection visits is
described in Chapter 6.
Before routine field visits are performed, a period of pilot testing should be implemented.
This will help ensure that time requirements for inspection and sampling are reconciled,
and that activities are planned to make the best use of staff time and other resources
(e.g. vehicles). Realistic estimation of travelling time is important to avoid exceeding
allowable sample storage times prior to analysis. Pilot testing should lead to the
development of a detailed inventory and description of sampling sites. If changes in
water quality with time are to be interpreted with confidence, samples must be taken
consistently from the same locations and/or from precisely identified locations. Pilot
testing also provides an opportunity for training personnel and allows their familiarisation
with particular aspects of the monitoring programme itself.
Co-ordination with the laboratory is an important aspect in determining the final value of
the sampling expedition. In some cases, the laboratory will be responsible for
preparation of sample containers and chemical additives for sample preservation, and
may also be responsible for the provision and maintenance of equipment for on-site
testing.
Laboratory capacity is an important area of concern which should be addressed in
programme design and in pilot testing. It is essential that the workload generated by a
sampling expedition is properly managed within the laboratory; it is therefore vital that
analysts know how many samples will be arriving, the approximate time of arrival and
the analyses that are to be carried out. Excessive delays before sample processing and
analysis may render the sample results invalid (and thereby useless) for the
management purposes for which they had been collected. Therefore, the timing of
sample delivery to the laboratory and the workload management within the laboratory
should be co-ordinated prior to fieldwork.
Good logistical preparation prior to fieldwork requires that equipment is checked to
ensure that it is functioning properly (e.g. electrodes tested and calibrated, batteries
charged). The correct number, size and type of sample containers must be prepared and
transport must be arranged, ensuring permission and local access to any restricted sites.
It is essential to prepare a sampling checklist which includes maps of sampling site
locations, a list of equipment required and a detailed explanation of the methods for
sample collection. The checklist should also include lists of the types and numbers of
samples to be taken at each site, as well as of the required volumes. Good preparation
for sampling involves previous labelling of sampling containers with at least the site, date
and depth from which the sample is to be taken.
11.1.2 Frequency of field visits
The frequency of site inspection and sampling must be adapted to the local situation as
described in Chapter 10. Key criteria are:
• Potable water supply reservoirs may need to be monitored regularly throughout the
year if perennial persistence of cyanobacteria cannot be ruled out. This applies
particularly to warm climates and in temperate zones to water bodies populated by
certain taxa such as Planktothrix.
• Monitoring of recreational lakes in tropical countries may cover the whole year, while in
temperate zones it can be focused on the warm season from early summer to autumn.
• The frequency of site inspection and sampling should be increased during
development of cyanobacterial populations or when persistent blooms occur.
11.1.3 Safety
Caution and attention are appropriate while working with cyanobacteria, particularly
when they are highly concentrated in scums. It is wise to treat all blooms as highly toxic.
Contact with water should be minimised during sampling and gloves and rubber boots
should be worn because cyanobacteria might contain toxins and could also have a high
allergenic potential.
In some areas of the world other water-based hazards such as schistosomes (the cause
of schistosomiasis or bilharzia) may also be present. In such circumstances water
contact should be minimised and following contact the skin should be vigorously dried.
Caution during fieldwork should also apply during the use of boats or other vessels and
whilst wading, especially in waters with low transparency where underwater hazards
may not be readily visible.
11.2 Site inspection
Sites used for drinking water abstraction or recreation should be subject to programmed
inspection by trained professional staff, and preferably in conjunction with sampling
expeditions. Careful inspection can assist interpretation of results from sample analysis.
Moreover the development of personal expertise in relation to specific water bodies can
provide the best form of early warning system.
A protocol for site inspection should be established (see Box 11.1) that includes the
ambient data of temperature, wind and other weather conditions as well as an estimate
of the situation during the previous 24 hours.
High nutrient input from, for example sewage outlets or run-off from excessively fertilised
areas favours the development of cyanobacteria (Chapter 8). Site inspection protocols
should also address the identification of sources of nutrient input and significant land
uses, as well as land use changes that may assist in the interpretation of findings. Such
assessment is not necessary during every sampling tour but is particularly
recommended during the pilot phase, and at moderate intervals, such as annually, when
changes in the catchment area are suspected.
Box 11.1 Example protocol for site inspection and follow-up
1. Note ambient and weather conditions and, if possible, also those conditions during the past 24
hours, especially wind direction and velocity.
2. Assess the areas most likely to be affected by cyanobacterial blooms first, i.e. the downwind
shores.
3. Determine if:
• The bottom of the lake is clearly visible at approximately 30 cm depth along the shore line.
• Note any distinct green or blue-green discolouration of the water; if a Secchi disc is available,
note the transparency.
• Note if cyanobacteria can be seen as green or blue-green streaks on the surface, or as
accumulations in bays and along shorelines.
• Note whether green or blue-green scums affect large parts of the water surface.
4. If cyanobacteria are present (according to Item 3 above):
• Initiate monitoring, if not already in place.
• Initiate an inspection of the catchment area for sources of nutrient inputs.
• Initiate temporary intensification of monitoring, if necessary, for safeguarding healthy use for
drinking water or recreation (see Chapter 10).
5. If heavy blooms or scums are observed, immediately:
• Inform other parties concerned (water suppliers, health authorities, operators of recreational
sites).
• Inform public and consider posting warning notices at bathing sites, and intervening against use
for water contact sports (see sections 5.2.2 and 6.2.2).
6. If cyanobacteria or dense algal growth is a problem, check whether nutrient pollution sources
are apparent, or whether a specific catchment inspection tour should be initiated (see Chapter 8).
When scums appear on the water surface, cyanobacteria may be present in densities
hazardous to human health, and thus appropriate responses should be initiated quickly
(see sections 11.3 and 6.4) and samples for further analysis should be taken. Sampling
of scums outside designated or habitual bathing sites is also of great value for
determining and predicting further risk, e.g. for when wind directions change during the
following days.
11.3 Sampling
Sampling may address both cyanobacterial population development and hazardous
accumulations. Informed on-site decision-making is necessary to refine sampling
programmes. Samples addressing population development as a basis for assessing the
potential for hazardous concentrations are usually taken at one or several points in the
water body. These points should be representative for the whole water body and are
often where it is deepest. For assessing hazards, samples must also be taken in areas
where accumulations of cyanobacteria can affect both humans and livestock, or they
should be taken at the raw water intake of drinking water reservoirs. The potential for
spatial heterogeneity demonstrated by some species (see section 2.2), i.e. horizontal
and vertical variations in both cell numbers and toxin content, must also be considered
when selecting the number and location of sampling sites.
Sample collection should always be accompanied by a site inspection (see section 11.2)
because the data obtained during the inspection will be important in the interpretation of
the results of sampling.
Sample collection and storage procedures differ depending on the type of analysis which
will be carried out. The three principal categories of analysis usually performed are:
• Nutrient analyses (phosphorus and nitrogen).
• Cyanobacterial identification and quantification.
• Cyanotoxin analysis, e.g. toxicity testing and analysis of cell-bound and dissolved toxin.
11.3.1 Sample containers
Containers and bottles for the transport of samples should ideally be provided by the
laboratory that will conduct the analyses. This helps to ensure that they are of a suitable
volume, are properly prepared and that due consideration has been given to the need for
pre-treatment and chemical addition. Field work is easier if bottles are pre-labelled and
well-arranged in suitable containers (in climates where storage in insulated containers is
not necessary, soft-drinks crates with subdivisions for each bottle are cheap and
practical). For routine sampling of the same sites, it is advisable to always use the same
bottle for each site and each parameter. This avoids cross-contamination, which is a
particular concern for phosphorus analyses. For most samples, glass bottles are
appropriate but often plastic containers can be used that are considerably lighter and
unbreakable. It should be decided in advance whether it is more practical to subdivide a
water sample into aliquots for each analysis prior to transportation, or whether a single
sample can be divided on receipt in the laboratory. The following containers are
recommended for the transport of cyanobacteria and related samples:
• Phosphorus analysis. Use 100 ml glass bottles pre-washed with and stored containing
sulphuric acid (4.5 mol l-1) or hydrochloric acid until usage. Phosphate is indicative of the
potential for cyanobacterial growth even when it is at very low concentrations (µg l-1) and,
therefore, special care must be taken to avoid contamination of samples. Contamination
may arise from phosphate-containing detergents or from previous storage of samples
with very high phosphate concentrations. Phosphates are easily adsorbed to glass
surfaces and may be released later when the bottle is filled with a new sample with low
concentration (see Chapter 12).
• Nitrate, ammonia and total nitrogen. Use clean 100 ml glass or polyethylene bottles.
• Microscopic identification of cyanobacteria. Wide-mouth polyethylene bottles are
appropriate for studying living material in a fresh grab or net sample (see below).
• Microscopic identification and quantification of cyanobacteria. Brown glass bottles (100
ml) are preferable. These should already have about 1 ml of Lugol's iodine or
formaldehyde solution added, or the preservative may be added immediately after filling
the bottles with the sample (see below). Clear glass bottles may be used but must be
stored in the dark because sunlight destroys iodine, thereby allowing the sample to
degrade.
• Cell material for analysis of cell-bound toxin concentrations. Use 1 litre (minimum
volume) containers, preferably made of glass although good results have also been
obtained with plastic. Containers should be pre-cleaned to prevent contamination.
• Cell material in large amounts (usually enriched with a plankton net) for structural
identification or some toxicity assays. Use plastic containers with wide necks to facilitate
filling. If samples are to be freeze-dried, the sample must be frozen in a layer not thicker
than 1-2 cm. Specimen containers (100 ml) for urine samples (easily obtained from
medical suppliers) are particularly suitable. Well-sealed, heavy-duty household plastic
bags can also be used, but care must be taken to avoid puncture because highly
concentrated cyanobacterial material can present a safety hazard. Bags should be
placed in watertight ice boxes for cool storage and as a precaution against leakage.
• Dissolved cyanotoxins. Use 1 litre (minimum volume) containers, preferably made of
glass although good results have also been obtained with plastic. Containers should be
pre-cleaned to prevent contamination.
• Chlorophyll a analysis. Brown glass bottles of 1 litre capacity are recommended to
avoid degradation of chlorophyll by sunlight. Clear bottles may be used if the samples
can be stored in the dark.
Preparation of Lugol's iodine solution for preserving phytoplankton samples Dissolve 20
g of potassium iodide in 200 ml of distilled water, mix thoroughly and add 10 g of
sublimated iodine. The solution must not be supersaturated with iodine because this can
result in crystal formation which interferes with cell counting. Supersaturation can be
tested by diluting 1 ml of stock solution to 100 ml with distilled water to give
concentrations similar to those used for preserving samples. If iodine crystals appear
after standing, more potassium iodide (approximately 5 g) should be added and the test
repeated. If no crystals appear, 20 ml of glacial acetic acid is added. Use about 1 ml of
Lugol's iodine to preserve 100 ml of phytoplankton sample. The resultant sample should
be the colour of whisky).
Dense scum samples may rapidly consume the iodine from the Lugol's solution. If
samples lose the whisky colour, and particularly if they no longer smell of iodine, they
are likely to decay. Samples stored for more than 10 weeks should be periodically
checked for sufficient preservation; further drops of Lugol's solution may be added if
necessary. If substantially more than 1 ml per 100 ml are required, the volume of Lugol's
solution added to the sample should be determined because the sample volume will
have changed appreciably and a corrective calculation is required for the cell counts.
11.3.2 Types of sample
Two different types of sample can be taken from lakes or similar surface waters. The
simplest, a "grab" sample, is a discrete volume of water taken at a selected location,
depth and time. Grab samples are also known as "spot" or "snap" samples (see Bartram
and Ballance (1996) for different sampling devices and a description of available
methods). In contrast, composite or integrated samples are made up of several sub-
samples from different parts of the water body. These are aimed at representative
sampling of a water body. Whereas grab samples are suitable for analysing situations at
specific sites (e.g. maximum density of cyanobacteria or cyanotoxins at a bathing beach),
composite samples are preferable for assessing the water body's total content of a
substance (e.g. total phosphorus potentially available for phytoplankton growth) or the
population of an organism (e.g. the size of a cyanobacterial population). Composite
samples are particularly important if the variables to be assessed are unevenly
distributed. If knowledge of the precise distribution is required, each sample can be
evaluated individually. However, the integration of samples prior to analysis is often far
more cost-effective.
Depth-integrated samples may be obtained either by continuously sampling the total
column of water from the surface to just above the sediment, or by discontinuously
taking grab samples from representative depths and then mixing them together. The
latter is particularly appropriate for deep lakes. However, in order to choose
representative depths and to achieve meaningful integration, knowledge of thermal
stratification of the water body is necessary.
Figure 11.1 Vertical distribution of chlorophyll a and a toxin (desmethyl-
microcystin-RR) from the species Planktothrix agardhii in Lake Östra Kyrksundet
in relation to hydrophysical conditions on 6 July 1988. Light intensity is given as a
percentage of surface intensity (Reproduced from Lindholm and Meriluoto, 1991,
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 48, with permission)
The thermal stratification of a water body is influenced by the morphology of lakes and
reservoirs, the latitude, weather conditions and the physical nature of the water. It can be
determined by measuring vertical profiles of temperature within the water body. Where
thermal stratification occurs, it results in a water body functioning as two separate
masses of water (the epilimnion and the hypolimnion) with different physicochemical
characteristics and cyanobacterial populations, and with a transitional layer (metalimnion)
sandwiched between (Figures 11.1 and 11.2). In temperate climates, thermal
stratification generally occurs seasonally in water bodies of appropriate depth, whereas
in tropical climates it often follows diurnal time patterns. Thermal stratification has
important implications for the depth at which cyanobacteria are likely to be found (some
species may accumulate on the surface, some in the metalimnion, see also section 2.2),
as well as for concentrations of nutrients and interpretation of phosphorus and nitrogen
data. Usually, shallow (2-3 m), wind-exposed lakes are unstratified, whereas in
temperate climates deeper lakes usually exhibit a stable stratification from spring to
autumn. Lakes of intermediate depth (e.g. 5-7 m) may develop transient thermal
stratification for a few calm and sunny days, and which is then disrupted by the next
event of rain or wind.
Figure 11.2 Derivation of representative depths for taking discontinuous samples
and derivation of the volume of each sample
Thermal stratification usually results in inhomogeneous distributions of oxygen, nutrients,
and populations of algae, cyanobacteria and other organisms. However, even when
temperature is uniform throughout depth, stratification of organisms may develop on
calm days. Depth gradients of oxygen concentration and pH are good indicators of this.
Depth-integrated samples are more adequate than surface grab samples for the
assessment of population size and nutrient concentration in such homothermous
situations.
In deeper lakes or reservoirs with thermal stratification, depth-integrated sampling of
representatively chosen depths is necessary - taking samples evenly spaced over depth
may not yield fully representative results. When background information on the typical
stratification characteristics of a given lake is available (e.g. from a temperature profile
previously taken with a probe), sample numbers can be reduced by selecting adequate
depths to represent specific strata. If depth intervals are unequal and samples are to be
integrated, the volume of each sub-sample must be chosen to represent the actual
fraction of the vertical gradient it represents (see Figure 11.2).
Figure 11.3 Simple tube devices for taking depth-integrated samples.
A. From shallow lakes or water layers (< 5 m);
B. From deeper layers (< 20 m)
Continuous depth-integrated samples are often quite adequate for shallow and
moderately deep water bodies. They can be obtained using a water pump (submersible
pumps are available which allow sampling at depth) attached to a garden hose which is
operated at a steady pumping rate while the water inlet is drawn upwards between the
desired depths at a uniform speed. The sample obtained is therefore representative of
the water column. A very simple hose-pipe sampler may be used to depths of 30-35 m.
This sampler is made of a piece of flexible plastic piping (a garden hose will do) of about
2 cm diameter and appropriate length; the pipe is weighted at one end and open at both.
The weighted end, to which a cord is attached, is lowered slowly into the water so that
when the tube is fully extended it encloses a columnar section of the water. Before
hauling in the lower end with the attached line, the upper end should be closed in order
to avoid loss of water once the lower end emerges from the surface. Hoses need to be
stored clean and dry between sampling trips to avoid microbial growth inside the tube.
A simple depth-integrating pipe or tube sampler for shallow water columns (5 m deep) or
for the surface layers of deeper water bodies is shown in Figure 11.3A. By combining
tube segments as described by Sutherland et al. (1992) the sample may be extended to
a total length of up to 20 m (Figure 11.3B).
Sampling scums
Scums of cyanobacteria often occur near shorelines at low water depths, and therefore
working with a grab-sampler or a plankton-net may be difficult. Sampling scums is
carried out more easily with a wide-necked plastic or glass container. When sampling
scums, a suitable approach must be developed which allows for their observed
heterogeneous density. Two samples can be useful for different purposes. One sample
can be aimed at assessment of the maximum density of cyanobacteria or highest toxin
levels by taking a sample from where the scum is thickest (move the bottle mouth along
the surface to collect the dense mats of buoyant cyanobacteria). The other sample can
aim to simulate conditions where shallow waters are mixed by bathers and playing
children (agitate the scum before submerging the bottle). Both types of sample can be
used for comparison.
Plankton net sampling
Sampling of cyanobacteria with a plankton net is mainly carried out when large
quantities of cell material are required (for example for toxicity testing or for extended
chemical analysis) or when only a qualitative analysis of the phytoplankton is necessary.
In contrast to the use of depth samplers which quantitatively trap all of the particles in a
defined volume, the water volume filtered through a plankton net cannot be determined
precisely. Calculations based on the area of the net opening and on the length and the
distance it has been hauled are not recommended because they strongly overestimate
the amount of water actually filtered (due to clogging of the pores in the net, only a
fraction of the water volume actually passes through the net).
The depth at which the plankton net is deployed is dependent on the taxa of algae
and/or cyanobacteria present. Floating cells (e.g. Microcystis, Anabaena) are harvested
within the upper metres of the water column, while the sampling of well mixed or
stratified water bodies with distinct depth distributions of cyanobacteria (e.g. Planktothrix,
see Figure 11.1) may include deeper water layers.
11.4 Nutrients, cyanobacteria and toxins
11.4.1 Nutrient analysis (phosphorus and nitrogen)
Mass developments of cyanobacteria are associated with high nutrient concentrations.
Phosphorus is usually the key nutrient controlling proliferation, although the availability of
nitrogen may be an important variable to assess because it can influence whether or not
nitrogen-fixing species dominate (see Chapters 2 and 8).
Total phosphorus (from unfiltered samples) determines the capacity of a water body to
form cyanobacterial blooms. If dissolved phosphate (soluble reactive phosphate (SRP)
determined from filtered samples) is detected at concentrations of only a few
micrograms per litre, cyanobacterial growth and biomass are not limited by phosphate
(see Chapter 8). Because such low concentrations are critical for interpreting the
situation, sample contamination (e.g. through a few micrograms of dissolved phosphate
leaching from contaminated sample bottles, or through the release of phosphorus by
degradation of organic material during sample transport) may very easily lead to
misinterpretation. In contrast, samples for total phosphate analysis are less sensitive. If
SRP is important in a sampling programme, rapid filtration in the field or even on the
boat may be desirable, particularly in warm climates.
Transformations between nitrate and ammonia may occur, if samples are not stored
properly (cooled) and analysed rapidly (within 24 hours).
11.4.2 Identification and quantification of cyanobacteria
Cyanobacteria tend to accumulate in layers (at the surface or bottom) of sampling
containers. When samples are integrated or when sub-samples are taken, the sample
must be mixed immediately before sub-sampling.
In addition to the samples preserved with Lugol's solution, fresh unpreserved samples
are useful to aid microscopic identification, because Lugol's solution masks the
characteristic colours of the cyanobacteria, making it more difficult to recognise some
species. Unpreserved samples can be qualitative and are easily obtained by hauling a
plankton net (10 µm mesh) through the water column, or by taking a grab sample if the
density of cyanobacteria is high. Unpreserved samples for identification may be stored
for up to 24 hours, provided ambient temperature and light conditions are kept similar to
those in the field. If longer storage is necessary, preservation with formaldehyde may be
useful.
11.4.3 Samples for chlorophyll a analysis
When collecting samples for chlorophyll a determination it should be born in mind that
this pigment will start to degrade rapidly after collection; therefore it is essential to keep
storage times to a minimum. Filtration at the sampling site and storage of the filters in an
ice box is recommended for warm climates. If samples are to be filtered and analysed in
the laboratory, they should be transported as soon as practically possible (e.g. within 4
hours) and processed immediately on arrival.
Apparatus
• Measuring cylinder
• On-site filtration equipment, including vacuum hand pump and filter cup
• Glass fibre filters, GF/C, 47 mm
• Plastic Petri dishes and/or aluminium foil
Procedure
1. Thoroughly mix the sample and pour immediately into a measuring cylinder. Pass the
measured sample through the glass fibre filter with the aid of a hand vacuum pump. If
samples are dense, begin by filtering a small volume. If this is easily filtered, add more
sample, mixing every time a sub-sample is poured from the bottle. Use as much sample
as will easily pass through the filter leaving a distinctly visible greenish layer on the filter.
Record the volume of water filtered.
2. Once filtration is complete, carefully remove the filter from the filtration apparatus and
either place it in a Petri dish or wrap it in aluminium foil.
3. Fold the filter with the cells innermost because this both protects the pigment from
light and also prevents the sample from being dislodged from the filter surface.
4. Keep filters at near freezing temperatures and in the dark prior to their delivery to the
analytical laboratory. Deep-freeze filters if storage of several hours or more is necessary.
11.4.4 Bulk samples of cyanobacteria for cyanotoxin detection
For some purposes, it is important to collect a large amount of cell material using a
plankton net as described in section 11.3; toxicity tests for example require large
quantities because bioassays (e.g. mouse test) are less sensitive than chemical analysis.
Large amounts of cell material may also be needed for some detailed chemical analyses
(see Chapter 13). If the results are to be related to the dry weight of cellular material, a
quantitative sample (i.e. sampling all particles of a defined water volume) is not
necessary.
For later expert identification of the cyanobacterial taxa, and particularly for relating toxin
concentrations to cell numbers or biomass of specific taxa, a subsample for cell counts
may be taken directly from a well-mixed net sample before it is frozen. It is important to
realise that plankton net hauls accumulate particles selectively (enriching large cells and
colonies more than small or thin ones) and are therefore likely to contain a different
quantitative distribution of taxa than the sample used for assessing the composition of
cyanobacteria (as described in 11.3.2). Such subsamples for microscopy should be
preserved in 10 per cent formaldehyde or Lugol's solution in a separate container; small
volumes (e.g. 10 ml) are sufficient.
High biomass densities in such concentrated samples may rapidly consume the
preservation capacity of Lugol's solution. If not analysed within several days, samples
should be periodically checked for their preservation capacity; if they no longer show a
brown colouration, more Lugol's solution should be added. Dilution of the sample may be
useful to avoid rapid consumption of preservative (i.e. 1 ml net plankton sample, 8 ml
water, 1 ml Lugol's iodine solution or formaldehyde).
11.4.5 Quantitative analysis of cell-bound and dissolved toxins
For recreational sites and for assessment of the total toxin concentration, cell-bound
toxins are of primary importance. The concentration of dissolved toxin in the water is of
special interest for drinking water reservoirs and where large amounts of cyanotoxin
such as anatoxin-a are released into the water (Bumke-Vogt et al., 1996). Large
volumes may be required for dissolved toxin analysis (e.g. 1 litre) and this should be
checked with the analytical laboratory. If the concentration of cell-bound and dissolved
cyanotoxin is to be related to the water volume from which the cells were collected, a
defined volume must be filtered. Several methods have been proposed (Coyle and
Lawton, 1996; Gjølme and Utkilen, 1994) and are described in detail in section 13.1.
Essentially samples are handled in a similar manner as those prepared for chlorophyll a
analysis. The filtration step can be readily performed at the sampling site but with the
following modifications:
• Glass fibre or membrane filters may be pre-weighed so that the amount of material
retained (i.e. dry weight of cells) can be determined. Thus, toxin concentration can be
related both to dry weight and to water volume.
• The filtrate can be collected, placed in a glass bottle and processed as described in
Chapter 13 to enable the dissolved cyanotoxin concentration to be determined.
• Filters and filtrate should be kept cool.
Laboratory studies have shown that the microcystin content of material collected and
dried on filters is unaltered for several months, when the filters are stored in the dark at
room temperature and low humidity. So far this method has been shown to be useful for
microcystin as well as for anatoxin-a.
11.5 On-site analysis
Analyses for many variables can be carried out in the field. A significant advantage of
on-site testing is that tests are carried out on fresh samples that have not been
contaminated or otherwise changed as a result of storage. Variables generally analysed
on-site are:
• Transparency (with a Secchi disc). Cyanobacteria may occur as floating streaks or
mats on the water surface (see Chapter 2) making it difficult to obtain representative
transparency data (depending on the measuring site values can vary from 0.2 to 2 m). It
may be useful to determine the transparency in areas without floating cells as well as
within scums. The Secchi disc has to be lowered very carefully so as not to destroy the
formation of accumulated cyanobacterial cells, and before taking the measurement the
surface scums should be given time to return to their original position (i.e. their position
prior to disturbance by the Secchi disc).
Bathers can easily perform an improvised transparency determination while standing
knee-deep in the water and being careful to avoid suspending the sediment. If greenish
turbidity obscures their view of their feet, a significant cyanobacterial bloom could be
present corresponding to a level at which some authorities advise against bathing (see
Chapter 5).
• Temperature (with a probe lowered into the water, or a thermometer reading taken
immediately from the sampling device).
• Dissolved oxygen (electrometrically with a probe or chemically with the Winkler
method).
Further details of the methods mentioned above are available in Bartram and Ballance
(1996).
11.6 Field records
As with every sampling programme, careful field records are of critical importance for
interpretation of results (see Bartram and Ballance, 1996). Field records involve pre-
prepared lists and questionnaires, but which also leave plenty of space for additional
comment and for the recording of observations. Such observation should include:
• Presence of scums.
• Weather conditions on the day of sampling and, if available, an indication of conditions
over the previous 2-3 days, because this affects the accumulation of cyanobacteria.
• Any additional or unusual observations, such as scum distribution, estimation of
numbers of people bathing despite the presence of scums, defect warning or prohibition
signs regarding bathing in scum areas, suggestions for improvement of the sampling
programme, previously undetected inlets, changes in agricultural practices (such as
previously unknown distribution of manure) or other use, etc.
11.7 Sample preservation and transport
As has been emphasised in several sections earlier in this chapter, samples must be
clearly labelled with sampling site (station), date and time of sampling and depth of
sampling. In general, samples should be stored cool and dark in a storage box, taking
into consideration the following criteria:
• Cool storage is most important for all samples to be filtered because biological activity
may enhance shifts between particulate and dissolved fractions of the variable to be
analysed (biological activity is strongly enhanced by high temperatures). This is
particularly important for nutrient samples, chlorophyll a samples and samples for cell-
bound cyanotoxin analysis (whether collected on filters or with a plankton net). If storage
time exceeds 2-3 hours, particularly in warm climates, cooling during sampling and
transportation is recommended.
• Unpreserved samples for identification of cyanobacteria, fixed samples for determining
cyanobacterial cell numbers and biomass, and samples fixed with Winkler's reagents for
oxygen determination should be stored at ambient temperatures but protected from
direct sunlight.
• Storage times should be kept as short as possible, generally in the range of a few
hours. Storage times over 24 hours should be avoided. Specific descriptions of
preservation and transportation of samples for toxicity testing or toxin analysis of
cyanobacterial cells are given together with the sampling methods and in Table 11.1.
Table 11.1 Overview of sampling methods for the determination of cyanobacteria,
toxicity testing and toxin analysis
Purpose Equipment Preservation Transport Advantages Disadvantages
Determination of cyanobacteria
Qualitative Plankton net Unpreserved, Cool and Formaldehyde Caution necessary
(10 µm); or dark does not when using
depth formaldehyde discolour the formaldehyde
sampler1 solution sample
Quantitative Depth Lugol's Cool and Lugol's solution Colour of algae
sampler1 solution dark enhances changed by Lugol's
settling in solution
counting (identification
chambers difficulties for less
experienced staff)
Toxicity tests and toxin analysis
Qualitative, Plankton net Must be frozen Cool up to Provides large No relation to water
(large (25-50 µm within 24 24 hours, amount of cell volume; sampling
amounts) mesh) hours, freeze- otherwise material for efficiency less than
drying frozen or toxicity testing 100%; selective
freeze- and toxin
dried analyses
Quantitative
1. Cell- Depth Directly frozen Cool up to Cheap, quick, No large amounts of
bound toxin sampler1; until analysis 24 hours, easy to send; cell material for
Filter hand vacuum or air dried to or send direct relation to further analysis;
method pump or send to dried filters volume; biomass amount of toxin on
filtering laboratory estimate filters may be below
device; glass possible with detection limit;
fibre or pre-weighed caution required in
membrane filters humid climates with
filters dried filters
Plankton net Plankton net Must be frozen Cool up to Provides large Selective sampling
with defined (10 µm mesh) within 24 24 hours, amount of cell with a net
water graduated hours; freeze- otherwise material for toxin
volume bucket drying frozen or analysis and
freeze- toxicity testing:
dried relation to water
volume
2. Dissolved Depth Frozen Cool up to Filters and
toxin sampler1; 24 hours, filtrates can be
hand vacuum otherwise obtained in one
pump or frozen step
filtering
device; glass
fibre or
membrane
filters
1 Depth samplers include Ruttner, Van Doom, hose sampler or water pump
11.8 References
Bartram, J. and Ballance, R. 1996 Water Quality Monitoring. A Practical Guide to the
Design and Implementation of Freshwater Quality Studies and Monitoring Programmes.
E & FN Spon, London, 383 pp.
Bumke-Vogt, C., Mailahn, W., Rotard, W., Chorus, I. 1996 A highly sensitive analytical
method for the neurotoxin Anatoxin-a and first application to laboratory cultures.
Phycologia, 35 (6, Supplement), 51-56.
Coyle, S.M. and Lawton, L.A. 1996 Development of an extraction procedure for the
quantitative analysis of microcystins in cyanobacterial cells. Phycologia, 35(6,
Supplement), 57-61.
Gjølme, N. and Utkilen, H. 1994 A simple and rapid method for extraction of toxic
peptides from cyanobacteria. In: G.A. Codd, T.M. Jeffries, C.W. Keevil and E. Potter
[Eds] Detection Methods for Cyanobacterial Toxins. Royal Society of Chemistry,
Academic Press, London, 168-171.
Lindholm, T. and Meriluoto, J.A.O. 1991 Recurrent depth maxima of the hepatotoxic
cyanobacterium Oscillatoria agardhii. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 48, 1629-1634.
Sutherland, T.F, Leonard, C. and Taylor, F.J.R. 1992 A segmented pipe sampler for
integrated profiling of the upper water column. J. Plankton Res., 14, 915-923.
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health consequences,
monitoring and management
Edited by Ingrid Chorus and Jamie Bartram
© 1999 WHO
ISBN 0-419-23930-8
Chapter 12. DETERMINATION OF CYANOBACTERIA IN
THE LABORATORY
This chapter was prepared by Linda Lawton, Blahoslav Marsalek, Judit Padisák, Ingrid
Chorus
Identification and quantification of cyanobacteria in water resources is the principal
component of cyanotoxin monitoring programmes and can provide an effective early
warning system for the development of potentially toxic blooms. Data on concentrations
of total phosphate, nitrate and ammonia are valuable for assessing the potential for
cyanobacteria to develop and whether or not nitrogen-fixing species are likely to occur.
Whereas methods for these nutrients have been extensively reviewed and internationally
harmonised by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), approaches to
the species determination and quantification of cyanobacteria are very variable and can
be undertaken at different levels of sophistication.
Rapid and simple methods can be employed to analyse the composition of a sample at
the level of differentiation by genera (rather than species), which is often sufficient for a
preliminary assessment of potential hazard and for initial management decisions.
Further investigation may be necessary in order to address quantitative questions, such
as whether cyanobacteria are present above a threshold density. Rapid quantitative
counting methods can give useful estimates of cell numbers with a counting effort of less
than one hour per sample (sometimes within minutes), and the bulk method of biomass
estimation by chlorophyll a determination can be very time-effective with only moderate
equipment demands. More detailed taxonomic resolution and biomass analysis is
required if population development or toxin content needs to be predicted. Distinction
between these approaches is important because management must decide how
available staff hours are most effectively invested. In many cases, the priority will be
evaluation of a larger number of samples at a lower level of precision.
The choice of methods further requires informed consideration of sources of variability
and error at each stage of the monitoring process, particularly with respect to sampling
(see Chapter 11). Water bodies with substantial temporal and spatial variation of
cyanobacterial cell density may show several-fold deviation in cell numbers between
samples taken within a few minutes or within 100 m, and precise determination of
biomass in one sample per week therefore will not produce a basis for assessment of
population size. Much better information can be gained by investing the same effort into
a less precise evaluation of a larger number of samples (e.g. 10 samples taken at
intervals of 100 m, or every day). Information return on working time investment can
further be optimised by regular intralaboratory calibrations of methods and their quality
control by comparing results with the rapid methods to results of elaborate and precise
methods.
This chapter describes methods for cyanobacterial determination and quantification at
different levels of accuracy. For determination of the concentrations of key nutrients
which control cyanobacterial biomass and species composition, the standard
international methods developed by ISO are also reviewed.
12.1 Sample handling and storage
Consideration of the type of information required and decisions regarding the type of
analysis required should be made prior to sample collection (see Chapters 10 and 11).
However, this is not always possible, particularly when a routine monitoring programme
is not in place. Samples may therefore require immediate evaluation on arrival in the
laboratory to determine if pretreatment is needed prior to appropriate sample storage.
Samples that have been taken for microscopic enumeration should ideally be preserved
with Lugol's iodine solution at the time of collection (Chapter 11). These samples will be
relatively stable and no special storage is required, although they should be protected
from extreme temperatures and strong light. However, samples should be examined and
counted as soon as practically possible because some types of phytoplankton are
sensitive to prolonged storage, and Lugol's iodine solution disintegrates over extended
storage periods (usually in the range of months, but in a shorter period in very dense
samples).
Unpreserved samples for quantitative microscopic analysis require immediate attention
either by addition of preservative or by following alternative counting methods which do
not use preserved cells. Where unpreserved samples cannot be analysed immediately
they should be stored in the dark with the temperature kept close to ambient field
temperatures. Unpreserved samples are preferable for species identification because
some characteristics cannot be recognised in preserved samples. For example, colonies
of Aphanizomenon have a characteristic bundle structure which facilitates identification,
but preservatives tend to disintegrate the colonies, and the single filaments are more
difficult to distinguish from other genera. While samples for quantification must be
preserved immediately or counted, samples for identification may be analysed within 24
hours because changes in numbers are less important.
Samples for the analysis of chlorophyll a, total and dissolved phosphate as well as
nitrate and ammonia, should be filtered as soon after sampling as possible. Storage for a
few hours in the dark in glass bottles is usually acceptable if temperatures do not exceed
20 °C. Filtration at the sampling site is recommended, particularly in warm climates, or
filtration should occur immediately upon arrival in the laboratory (see section 11.4.3).
Filtered samples for nutrient analysis may be stored in the refrigerator for a few hours
prior to analysis, or deep-frozen at -18 °C for several weeks. Although the suitability of
storage of filters for chlorophyll a analysis at -18 °C is currently under debate, the
method is employed by many laboratories if immediate extraction cannot be organised.
12.2 Cyanobacterial identification
Microscopic examination of a bloom sample is very useful even when accurate
enumeration is not being carried out. The information obtained regarding the
cyanobacteria detected can provide an instant alert that harmful cyanotoxins may be
present. This information can determine the choice of bioassay or analytical technique
appropriate for determining toxin levels (see Chapter 13).
Most cyanobacteria can be readily distinguished from other phytoplankton and particles
under the microscope by their morphological features at a magnification of 200-1,000
times. Figure 12.1 shows the most frequently occurring of the species known to produce
toxins. Cyanobacterial taxonomy, following the established botanical code, differentiates
by genera and species. However, this differentiation is subject to some uncertainty, and
organisms classified as belonging to the same species may nonetheless have
substantial genetic differences, e.g. with respect to microcystin production (see Chapter
3). Genetically identical cells, obtained by isolation of one colony and cultivation of its
daughter cells, are termed strains or genotypes, and field populations of one species (or
morphotype, i.e. identified as species on the grounds of morphological similarity) consist
of a number of genotypes which cannot be differentiated microscopically. Current
understanding of the regulation of cyanotoxin production indicates that distinction of
genera is very important for assessing potential toxicity (see Chapter 3), but that
microcystin content varies extremely at the level of genotypes or strains, rather than at
the level of species. This is one reason why identification to the taxonomic level of
genera (e.g. Microcystis, Planktothrix, Aphanizomenon, Anabaena) is frequently
sufficient. It is preferable to give only the genus name, especially if differentiation
between species by microscopy is uncertain on the basis of current general taxonomic
knowledge, a lack of locally available expertise, or lack of characteristic features of the
specimens to be identified. This must be emphasised because "good identification
practice" has frequently been misunderstood to require determination down to the
species level, and this has lead to numerous published misidentifications of species.
Figure 12.1 The most frequently occurring species of cyanobacteria known to produce
toxins
Coelosphaerium
Gomphosphaeria
Microcystis
Synechococcus
Synechocystis
Pseudanabaena
Oscillatoria
Trichodesmium
Schizothrix
Lyngbya
Phormidium
Cylindrospermopsis
Aphanizomenon
Nostoc
Anabaena
Hormothamnion
Nodularia
Gloeotrichia
Practitioners in health authorities with some experience in using a microscope can easily
learn to recognise the major cyanobacterial genera and some prominent species which
occur in the region they are monitoring. They should not be deterred by the pitfalls of
current scientific work in cyanobacterial taxonomy which targets differentiation to the
species level. Nevertheless, more precise identification of the dominant organisms down
to species level may be useful for a more accurate estimate of toxin content. For
example, Planktothrix agardhii and Planktothrix rubescens have both been shown to
contain microcystins, but each species contains different analogues with different toxicity.
For establishing cyanobacterial identification in a laboratory, initial consultation and later
occasional co-operation with experts on cyanobacterial identification (as outlined in
Chapter 10) is helpful. Training courses for beginners should focus on the genera and
species relevant in the region to be monitored. Experts can assist in initially deriving a
list of these taxa and the criteria for their identification. In the course of further monitoring,
experienced experts should be consulted periodically for quality control and for updating
such a list.
Publications assisting in the determination of cyanobacterial genera and species include
Komárek and Anagnostidis (1986) and Anagnostidis and Komárek (1988).
12.3 Quantification
Rapid methods for frequent monitoring of large numbers of water bodies or sampling
sites have been developed in some countries. These cannot be readily standardised and
evaluated internationally, but require adaptation to regional or local conditions. Deciding
on the appropriate classification of units to count depends upon variations such as
whether prevalent taxa are filamentous or coccoid, whether they are colony-forming or
occur as single filaments or cells, and whether populations are very diverse or largely
mono-specific. One rapid method which is highly standardised and simplified involves
counting a 0.5 ml sample of water for 2 minutes and determining the number of
cyanobacterial units present. A table has been prepared which provides adjustment
factors to take into account differences in the number of cells present in filaments or
colonies.
Cyanobacterial biomass can also be determined using indirect methods, the most
common being chlorophyll a quantification. This is a rapid and simple method but it is
open to interference by chlorophyll a from other phytoplankton, hence it is best used
when cyanobacteria are the main or dominant organisms present.
12.3.1 Enumeration
Microscopic enumeration of cyanobacterial cells, filaments or colonies has the
advantage of directly assessing the presence of potentially toxic organisms. Little
equipment in addition to a microscope is required. The method may be rather time
consuming, ranging from a few minutes to several hours per sample, depending upon
the accuracy required and the number of species to be differentiated. The remaining of
this section begins by outlining precise and widely accepted counting procedures which
are more time consuming and require a moderate level of expertise, but serve as a
bench mark to assess the performance of simplified methods developed to suit the
expertise and requirements of a sampling programme.
Sample concentration by sedimentation or centrifugation
Direct counting of preserved cells is typically carried out by Utermöhl's counting
techniques using a counting chamber and inverted microscope (Utermöhl, 1958). This
method is well suited for assessment of a large variation in cell type and is widely
accepted as one of the most reliable. Counting chambers and sedimentation tubes are
commercially available or can be constructed by the investigator. The most commonly
used chambers have a diameter of 2.5 cm and a height of about 0.5-2 cm and thus can
contain 2-10 ml of sample. These chambers can fit easily on the stage of an inverted
microscope. If larger volumes of water need to be analysed, as is the case when cell
density is low (e.g. in drinking water or at the beginning of population development), then
the height of the tube has to be increased. Such extended tubes, however, are too tall to
fit on the inverted microscope stage and the light would have to pass through a
considerable thickness of liquid before reaching the sedimented specimens. This
problem can be overcome by using a tube in two sections which allows the supernatant
to be removed (after settling the sample) without disturbing the sedimented cells on the
bottom glass (Figure 12.2). The amount of sedimented water required depends on the
density of cells, on the counting technique (fields or transects, see later) and on the
magnification. If concentrations are high (such as from bloom material), even 2 ml may
contain too many cells for enumeration, and the sample will need to be diluted.
Apparatus
• Inverted microscope with 10x and 40x objectives
• Counting chamber with sedimentation tube
• Cyanobacterial identification key
• Sample preserved in Lugol's iodine solution (see section 11.3.1)
Figure 12.2 Counting chambers for use with inverted microscopes
Step 1
Cylinder is pressed firmly onto the counting chamber, sample is poured in, cylinder is sealed with
heavy round glass slide. Sedimentation requires 4 hours per cm of cylinder height.
Step 2
Thin, square cover slide is used to slide cylinder and supernatant off the counting chamber.
Procedure
1. Allow the sample to equilibrate to room temperature. If cold samples are placed
directly in the counting chamber, air-bubbles develop and prevent sedimentation.
2. Gently invert the bottle containing the sample several time to ensure even mixing of
the phytoplankton.
3. Pour the sample into the sedimentation tube in place over the counting chamber.
4. Place the counting chamber on a horizontal surface where it will not be disturbed or
exposed to direct sunlight.
5. Allow the sample to settle. Sedimentation times will vary depending on the height of
the sedimentation tube. Allow at least 3-4 hours per cm height of liquid. Where
neutralised formalin has been used as a preservative, double the time allowed for
sedimentation. Note that buoyant cells (i.e. those with gas vesicles) may not settle and
may require disruption of the gas vacuoles (see below). However, this problem is
frequently overcome by several days of storage with Lugol's solution, because uptake of
iodine increases the specific weight of the cells.
6. Phytoplankton density can now be determined by counting either the total number of
organisms on the base of the chamber or by counting subsections (transects, fields).
If an inverted microscope is not available, and samples with low cyanobacterial density
need to be counted, other techniques may be applied in order to concentrate samples
sufficiently (e.g. sedimentation in a measuring cylinder, followed by careful removal of
the supernatant).
Apparatus
• Glass measuring cylinder, 100 ml
• Glass pipette with pipette bulb or filler
• Standard laboratory microscope with 10x and 40x objectives
• Sample preserved in Lugol's iodine solution (section 11.3.1)
Procedure
1. Allow the sample to equilibrate to room temperature.
2. Gently invert the bottle containing the sample several times to ensure even mixing of
the phytoplankton.
3. Pour 100 ml of the sample into the measuring cylinder.
4. Allow the sample to sediment (3-4 hours per cm height of liquid) in a location where it
will be out of direct sunlight and it will not be disturbed.
5. Using the glass pipette with pipette bulb or filler attached, carefully remove the
supernatant, leaving only the last 5 ml undisturbed.
6. The sample has now been concentrated by a factor of 20 and can be counted using a
counting chamber (e.g. Sedgewick-Rafter or haemocytometer).
Where sedimentation is not possible, centrifugation can offer a rapid and convenient
method of concentrating a sample (Ballantine, 1953). Fixation with Lugol's iodine
solution enhances the susceptibility of cells to separation by centrifugation. However,
buoyant cells (i.e. those with gas vesicles) may still be difficult to pellet and may require
disruption of vacuoles prior to centrifugation by applying sudden hydrostatic pressure
(see below) (Walsby, 1992). Once concentrated, a known volume can be quantified
using a counting chamber or by counting a defined volume using a micropipette to place
a drop on a microscope slide. Observation and counting can be done with a standard
microscope.
Apparatus
• Centrifuge
• Centrifuge tube, 10-20 ml
• Syringe or bottle with cork, or plastic bottle with screw cap
• Standard laboratory microscope with 10x and 40x objectives
Reagents
• Aluminium potassium sulphate, 1.0 g AIK(SO ) .12H O in 100 ml distilled water
4 2 2
Procedure
1. Place 10-20 ml of sample in a centrifuge tube, seal with cap, and centrifuge at 360 × g
for 15 minutes.
2. When pelleting needs to be enhanced, add 0.05 ml of aluminium potassium sulphate
solution per 10 ml of sample. Mix and centrifuge as described.
3. Where problems occur with the pelleting of buoyant cells, try one of the following:
i) Place sample in a plastic syringe, ensure the end is tightly sealed, then apply pressure
to the plunger.
ii) Place sample in a bottle with a tightly fitting cork then bang the cork suddenly.
iii) Place sample in a well sealed plastic bottle and bring it down sharply onto a hard
surface.
These three approaches should be carried out with extreme care to avoid accidental
exposure to toxic cyanobacteria. Once they have been subjected to this pressure shock,
the gas vesicles should have been disrupted and cells should pellet when centrifuged.
4. Once cells have been centrifuged, carefully remove the supernatant and resuspend
the pellet in a small known volume (e.g. 0.5 ml).
5. Samples concentrated by centrifugation can be counted using a counting grid or
haemocytometer.
Counting cyanobacteria
Counting cyanobacteria involves defining the units to be counted. The majority of
planktonic cyanobacteria are present as filamentous or colonial forms consisting of a
large number of cells which are often difficult to distinguish. The accuracy of quantitative
determination depends on the number of counted objects (e.g. cells or colonies); the
relative error is approximately indirectly proportional to the square root of the number of
objects counted. The number of colonies, not the number of cells, is decisive for
accurate enumeration. However, the number of colonies is often not very high, even in
water containing a dense bloom where only 20-40 colonies may be present in a 100 ml
sample. Both filaments and colonies can differ greatly in the number of cells present,
hence results given as number of colonies (e.g. stating that 1 ml of sample contains an
average of 2.43 colonies of Microcystis aeruginosa) give little information on the quantity
of cyanobacteria present).
Typically, unicellular species are counted as cells per ml and filamentous species can
either be counted as number of filaments, and quoting an average number of cells per
filament. The cells per filament in the first 30 filaments encountered are often counted
and averaged. Alternatively, the total filament length per ml may be assessed as the
sum of the extension of each filament within a counting grid placed in the ocular of the
microscope. The latter approach is more precise when filament length is highly variable.
For colonial species, disintegration of the colonies and subsequent counting of the
individual cells is preferable to counting colonies and estimating colony size (Box, 1981).
Disintegration of colonies sometimes occurs several days after fixation with Lugol's
iodine solution. For more stable colonies, it can be achieved by alkaline hydrolysis (80-
90 °C for 15 min, followed by intensive mixing) or gentle ultrasonication. These methods
often separate cells very effectively, and even where colonies are not totally broken
down into single cells the colony size may be reduced sufficiently to allow single cells to
be counted. If this approach is impossible, the geometric volume of individual colonies
may be estimated. If colonies are relatively uniform in size, the average number of cells
per colony may be determined and then the colonies can be counted. Generally, the use
of published values for numbers per colony is not recommended because the size of
colonies varies greatly.
There are several systematic methods for counting cyanobacteria. Most approaches aim
at counting only a defined part of the sample and then calculating back to the volume of
the entire sample. The most common methods are:
• Total surface counting which requires the counting of all cells settled within the
chamber and may be very time consuming. This method is usually only appropriate for
counting very large units at low magnification.
• Counting cells in transects from one edge of the chamber to the other (Figure 12.3).
Transects should pass through the central point of the chamber. Some inverted
microscopes are equipped with special oculars so that the transect width can be
adjusted as required. However, in many cases, the horizontal or vertical sides of a
simple counting grid can be used to indicate the margin of the transect. Back-calculating
to a millilitre of sample requires measuring the area of the transects and of the chamber
bottom as well as the volume of the counting chamber.
• Counting cyanobacteria occurring in randomly selected fields ("Sichtfeld") (Figure 12.3).
It is recommended that the position of the chamber to find the next field should be
changed without looking through the microscope in order to prevent a bias in the
selection of fields. The Sichtfeld area covered by a counting grid is usually considered as
one field. However, if no counting grid is available the total spherical Sichtfeld can be
considered as a single field. Back-calculating to 1 ml of sample requires registration of
the number of Sichtfelds counted, measuring the area of the Sichtfeld and of the
chamber bottom, as well as knowing the volume of the counting chamber.
The density of different species in one sample can vary and there can also be several
orders of magnitude difference between the size of different species; hence it is
necessary to select the counting method to suit the sample. Total chamber surface
counting with low magnification (100x) is required for large species whereas transect or
field counting with higher magnification (200x, 400x) is used for smaller or unicellular
cyanobacteria. Accurate enumeration using transects or fields assumes on even
distribution of cyanobacteria on the bottom of chamber surface after sedimentation. Due
to inevitable convection currents, cells very rarely settle randomly on the surface of the
bottom glass and are, almost always, more dense either in the middle or around the
circumference of the chamber. Sometimes density also varies between opposite edges.
The inaccurate estimate that arises from uneven distribution can be minimised by
transect counting. Consequently, transect counting is the preferred method and counting
four perpendicular diameters minimises the error. The relation of precision to counting
time is very effective if about 100 counting units (cells, colonies, filaments) are settled in
one transect (for simplification, see Box 12.1). Samples are best diluted or concentrated
so that the number of units of the important taxa lies within this range.
Figure 12.3 Counting techniques used to enumerate cyanobacteria in water
samples
A note on filaments:
• Either count them just as cells (inaccurate if length is highly variable). In that case, the
one extending out of the grid to the right would be counted, but not the one extending
out to the left.
• Or estimate the length of filament within the boundaries of the grid. In this case: 3
boxes (bottom left) + 5 boxes (mid-right) = 8 boxes
Specimens occurring exactly on the margin of the counting area (transect or field)
present the common problem of whether to count them or not. When counting transects,
those specimen that lie across the left margin are ignored while those that cross the right
margin are included. When counting fields two predetermined sides of the grid are
included and the other two are ignored (Figure 12.3).
Box 12.1 Simplification for biomass estimates
With some experience and a flexible approach, the time needed for enumeration and
measurement of cell dimensions can be considerably reduced (down to 1 hour or less, if only one
or two species require counting) without substantial loss of accuracy. The procedure is as follows:
• If the deviation of numbers of dominant species counted in two perpendicular transects is less
than 20 per cent between both transects, do not count further transects.
• If the standard deviation of cell dimensions measured on 10 cells is less than 20 per cent, do
not measure further cells.
• If a set of samples from the same water body and only slightly differing sites (e.g. vertical or
horizontal profiles) is to be analysed, enumerate all samples, but measure cell dimensions only
from one. Check others by visual estimate for deviations of cell dimensions and conduct
measurements only if deviations are suspected.
There are different recommendations regarding the number of units per species that
must be counted to obtain reliable data. It is particularly difficult to count each species
with an acceptable error (20-30 per cent if 400 individual units are counted) in each
sample. Mass developments of cyanobacteria are characterised by dominance of one to
three species. Even if total phytoplankton is to be counted (for example in order to
assess the relative share of cyanobacteria), it is rare for more than six to eight species to
contribute to the majority of the biomass. Therefore, for total phytoplankton counts, it is
suggested that 400-800 specimens in each sample are counted, giving a maximum error
for the total count as 7-10 per cent. In this situation there will be a 10-20 per cent error
for the few dominant species, 20-60 per cent for the subdominant species and the rest of
the species can be considered as insufficiently counted. If only cyanobacteria are to be
counted, and only one or two species are present, counting up to the precision level of
20 per cent, by counting 400 individual units per species, can be accomplished within
less than one hour.
The use of mechanical or electronic counters for recording cell counts can shorten
counting time considerably, especially if only a few species are counted. Computer
keyboards can also be used together with suitable programmes for recording cell counts.
The use of an inverted microscope with counting chambers is generally the best
approach for estimating cyanobacterial numbers. However, a standard microscope is
sufficient for preconcentrated samples or for naturally dense samples from mass
developments, provided the size of the water drop enumerated can be defined (e.g. by
using a micropipette). Other counting chambers (e.g. Sedgewick-Rafter or
haemocytometer) are available for use with a standard microscope. It can also be useful
to monitor samples under high magnification with oil-immersion (1,000x) to check the
sample for the presence of very small species which may be overlooked during normal
counting.
An alternative counting method which has been found to be useful is syringe filtration.
This method is considerably less time consuming because it does not depend on lengthy
sedimentation times and uses a standard laboratory microscope.
Apparatus
• Syringe, 10 ml
• Membrane filters, 13 mm diameter with 0.45 µm pore
• Membrane filter holder
• Glass microscope slides plus coverslips
• Standard laboratory microscope with 10x and 40x objectives
Reagents
• Immersion oil
Procedure
1. Mix water sample by inverting several times.
2. Take up 10 ml of the sample into the syringe.
3. Place filter holder with filter in place, on the end of the syringe.
4. Gently filter the sample through the filter by applying pressure to the syringe piston.
5. Once all the sample has passed through the filter, remove the filter from the holder
and place it on a glass microscope slide with the captured cells uppermost.
6. Allow the filter to dry at room temperature then carefully add one or two drops of
immersion oil to the filter. The will make the filter appear transparent and permit
observation of the cyanobacterial cells trapped on its surface.
7. Finally, cover the filter surface with a glass coverslip and examine under the
microscope.
8. The density of cyanobacteria can be easily calculated by counting the number of cells
on the filter and dividing this by the volume of water filtered (i.e. number of cells per ml).
12.3.2 Determination of cyanobacterial biomass microscopically
Cell size can vary considerably within and between species, and toxin concentration
relates more closely to the amount of dry matter in a sample than to the number of cells.
Hence, cell numbers are often not an ideal measure of population size or potential
toxicity. This can be overcome by determining biomass. Two approaches are available,
either estimation from cell counts and average cell volumes, or from chemical analysis of
pigment content.
Cyanobacterial counts and cell volumes
Biovolume can be obtained from cell counts by determining the average cell volume for
each species or unit counted and then multiplying this value by the cell number present
in the sample. The result is the total volume of each species. Given a specific weight of
almost 1 mg mm-3 for plankton cells, this biovolume corresponds quite closely to
biomass. Average volumes are determined by assuming idealised geometric bodies for
each species (e.g. spheres for Microcystis cells, cylinders for filaments), measuring the
relevant geometric dimensions of 10 to 30 cells (depending upon variability) of each
species, and calculating the corresponding mean volume of the respective geometric
body.
Example 1
By measuring 20 Microcystis cells, an average diameter of 5 µm was established.
Assuming spherical-shaped cells the average cell volume is 4/3 πr3 = 65.4 µm3.
Enumeration resulted in 1 million cells per ml and thus the total biovolume is 65.4 × 106
µm3 ml-1.
Example 2
Measuring 30 Planktothrix filaments resulted in an average length of 225 µm and an
average diameter of 6 µm. Assuming cylindrical shaped filaments, the average filament
volume is 2 πr2 × L = 6,359 µm3. Enumeration resulted in 10,000 filaments per ml. Thus
the biovolume of Planktothrix was 63.6 × 106 µm3 ml-1.
Thus, although the number of Planktothrix was 100-fold less than that of Microcystis,
biovolumes were similar because the volume (and biomass) of a single Planktothrix
filament is about 100 times as large as that of a single Microcystis cell. Both species
often contain microcystins, and it is possible to compare the relative toxin content per
biovolume or biomass whereas there is little point in comparing toxin content in relation
to the respective cell numbers.
12.4 Determination of biomass using chlorophyll a analysis
The pigment chlorophyll a generally contributes 0.5-1 per cent of the ash-free dry weight
of phytoplankton organisms. Although the pigment content may vary according to the
physiological state of the organisms (e.g. it increases if light availability is low),
chlorophyll a is a widely used and accepted measure of biomass. It is an especially
useful measure during cyanobacterial blooms, when the phytoplankton chiefly consists
of cyanobacteria, often of only one species. However, when chlorophyll a determination
is used with mixed phytoplankton populations (cyanobacteria and other species), it gives
an overestimation of cyanobacterial biomass. Rough microscopic estimations of the
relative share of cyanobacterial cells among the total phytoplankton may be used to
correct the overestimate.
Analysis of chlorophyll a requires relatively simple laboratory equipment, principally
filtration apparatus, centrifuge and spectrophotometer. It is considerably less time-
consuming than microscopic biomass determination (but also less specific and less
precise). Standard protocols have been described (e.g. ISO, 1992) but preferred
methods vary somewhat between laboratories. However, the main procedural steps in
most methods are essentially the same: solvent extraction of chlorophyll a,
determination of the concentration of the pigment by spectrophotometry, and
adjustments to the result to reduce the interference by phaeophytin a which is a
degradation product of chlorophyll a. A simple method following the ISO procedure for
the determination of chlorophyll a in a lake water sample is outlined below.
Apparatus
• Spectrophotometer suitable for readings up to 750 nm, or photometer with discrete
wavelengths at 665 and 750 nm
• Glass cuvettes, typically of 1 cm path length, or 5 cm for very low concentrations (e.g.
from drinking water reservoirs at the beginning of population development)
• Centrifuge
• 15 ml centrifuge tubes, graduated and with screw caps
• Water bath at 75 °C or other heating device for boiling ethanol
• Glass fibre filters (GF/C), 47 mm diameter
• Filtration apparatus and vacuum pump
• Tissue grinder or ultrasonication device
• Pipette or similar for addition of acid
Reagents
• Ethanol (90 % aqueous)
• Hydrochloric acid, 1 mol l-1
Procedure
Perform the following steps in low intensity of indirect light because light induces rapid
degradation of chlorophyll.
1. After recording the initial volume of water, separate the cells from the water by
filtration. Filter continuously and do not allow the filter to dry during filtration of a single
sample. If extraction cannot be performed immediately, filters should be placed in
individual, labelled bags (filters folded in half with cells innermost) or Petri dishes and
stored at -20 °C in the dark (this may cause some pigment degradation and is not
recommended by ISO). This step can be carried out at the sampling site and the
samples are readily transported in this form. In preference to freezing, samples may be
stored in the extraction medium (see below) for up to 4 days in the refrigerator.
2. Place the filter in a tissue grinder, add 2-3 ml of boiling ethanol, and grind until the
filter fibres are separated. Ultrasonication can also be used. Pour the ethanol and
ground filter into a centrifuge tube, rinse out the grinding tube with another 2 ml ethanol
and add this to the centrifuge tube. Make up to a total of 10 ml in the centrifuge tube with
ethanol. Place cap on the tube, label and store in darkness at approximately 20 °C for
24-48 hours.
3. Centrifuge for 15 minutes at 3,000-5,000 g to clarify samples. Decant the clear
supernatant into a clean vessel and record the volume.
4. Blank Spectrophotometer with 90 per cent ethanol solution at each wavelength.
5. Place centrifuged sample in the cuvette and record absorbance at 750 nm and 665
nm (750a and 665a; absorbance at 750 is for turbidity correction and should be very low).
Readings at 665 nm should range between 0.1 and 0.8 units.
6. Add 0.01 ml of 1 mol I-1 HCl to sample in cuvette (adjust volume to suit the volume of
cuvette being used, calculating approximately 0.003 ml of 1 mol l-1 HCl per ml of ethanol
solution) and agitate gently for 1 minute. Record absorbance at 750 nm and 665 nm
(750b and 665b).
Calculation
1. Correct for turbidity by subtracting absorbance665a-750a = corrected 665a absorbance
665b-750b = corrected 665b absorbance
2. Use the corrected 665a and 665b absorbance to calculate:
where: V = Volume of ethanol extract (ml)
e
V = Volume of water sample (litres)
s
l = Path length of cuvette (cm)
Note, the ratio of chlorophyll a to phaeophytin a should give an indication of the condition
of the cyanobacterial (and algal) population, but may also reflect the effectiveness of
sample handling and preservation, because high levels of phaeophytin a indicate
degradation of chlorophyll a either in scenescent field populations or during analysis.
When samples are concentrated by filtration for the purposes of analysis, the cells die.
Consequently, the chlorophyll immediately starts to degrade to phaeopigments. If filters
are not rapidly extracted or frozen, chlorophyll a concentrations are thus reduced.
Occasionally, other factors affect this method, resulting in very low or even negative
values for chlorophyll a. This can be checked by calculating:
The result of this calculation should give a similar value to the sum of the concentrations
of both pigments determined separately, as above. Note also:
• If no centrifuge is available, filtration may be used instead.
• If no tissue grinder or ultrasonication device is available, proceed without this step.
Slight underestimations may occur. For cyanobacteria, these are not likely to be too
serious.
12.5 Determination of nutrient concentrations
The capacity for development of a cyanobacterial bloom depends on the available
concentrations of elements that the cells are composed of (chiefly carbon, hydrogen,
oxygen, phosphorus, nitrogen and sulphur). These elements are needed in the ratio in
which they occur in living cells (in weight units: 42 C, 8.5 H, 57 O, 7 N, 1 P and 0.7 S).
Hydrogen and oxygen are available in unlimited supply in an aqueous environment, and
sulphur is usually also present in surplus concentrations. Carbon has been investigated
as a potentially limiting factor, but has rarely been found to be relevant. Most often,
phosphorus concentrations limit the amount of biomass that can form in a given water
body but sometimes, nitrogen is limiting. The chief sources of nitrogen are nitrate and
ammonia, but to some extent their lack can be compensated by some cyanobacteria
through fixation of atmospheric nitrogen. Thus, even if phosphate is clearly the factor
limiting carrying capacity, knowledge of nitrogen availability helps to predict whether
nitrogen-fixing species are likely to grow.
Cyanobacterial cells appear to have little means of storing excess nitrogen, but can store
enough phosphate for up to four cell divisions, which implies that one cell can grow into
16 without needing to take up dissolved phosphate. Information on dissolved phosphate
concentrations, therefore, only demonstrates that if it can be detected, the phytoplankton
population is not currently limited by phosphate. In order to assess the capacity of the
water body to carry a cyanobacterial population, total phosphate must be determined,
which can then be compared with the total concentration of nitrogen salts and organic
nitrogen. However, in order to assess whether nitrogen may be limiting, analysis of
dissolved components (chiefly nitrate and ammonia) is sufficient.
Among the methods available, the procedure of Koroleff (1983) for determining total
phosphate has proved to be most reliable and is the basis of an ISO protocol. For nitrate
and ammonia, several methods are available, but the ISO method with the least
demands on equipment is described below. Details of ISO methods can be obtained
directly from ISO at Case Postale 56, CH-1211, Geneva 20, or requested through the
Internet on central@iso.ch.
12.5.1 Analysis of phosphorus according to ISO 6878
Phosphorus in various types of waters can be determined spectrometrically by digestion
of organic phosphorus compounds to orthophosphate and reaction under acidic
conditions to an antimony-phosphormolybdate complex which is then reduced to a
strongly coloured blue molybdenum complex. The internationally harmonised method
described by ISO/FDIS 6878 (ISO, 1998a) is applicable to many types of waters
(surface-, ground-, sea- and wastewater) in a concentration range of 0.005 to 0.8 mg l-1
(or higher if samples are diluted). Differentiation by the following fractions is possible
through filtration procedures:
Option Fraction Filtration/procedure
1 Soluble reactive phosphorus (SRP or orthophosphate) Filtered sample
2 Dissolved organic phosphate Digested filtered sample
3 Particulate phosphorus Option 4 minus option 2
4 Total phosphorus Digested unfiltered sample
Digestion or mineralisation of organophosphorus compounds to orthophosphate is
performed in tightly sealed screw-cap vessels with persulphate, under pressure and heat
in an autoclave (in the absence of which good results have also been obtained with
household pressure cookers), or simply by gentle boiling. Polyphosphates and some
organophosphorus compounds may also be hydrolysed with sulphuric acid to
molybdate-reactive orthophosphate. The following gives an overview of the procedure,
necessary equipment and chemicals, see ISO (1998) for details and specific problems.
Apparatus
• Photometer measuring absorbance in the visible and near infrared spectrum above
700 nm; sensitivity is optimal at 880 nm (and reduced by 30 per cent at 700 nm);
sensitivity is increased if optical cells of 50 mm are used (if 100 mm cells are available,
determination down to 0.001 mg I-1 may be possible)
• Filter assembly and membrane filters, 45 mm diameter with 0.45 µm pore
• For digestion of samples, an autoclave (or pressure cooker) suitable for 115-120 °C
• For digestion of samples, borosilicate vessels with heat-resistant caps that can be
tightly sealed
• Bottles for samples as described in Chapter 11
• Pre-cleaned glass bottles for filtered samples
Reagents
All reagents should be of a recognised analytical grade and the distilled water used must
have a negligible phosphorus concentration when compared with the samples
• Sulphuric acid (H SO ): 9 mol l-1
2 4
• Sulphuric acid (H SO ): 4.5 mol l-1
2 4
• Sulphuric acid (H SO ): 2 mol l-1
2 4
• Sodium hydroxide (NaOH): 2 mol l-1
• Ascorbic acid (C H O ): 100 g l-1 (stable for 2 weeks in amber glass bottle, refrigerated)
6 8 6
• Acid molybdate solution I: ammonium heptamolybdate tetrahydrate [(NH ) Mo O . 4
4 6 7 24
H O] 13 g per 100 ml and antimony potassium tartrate hemihydrate [K(SbO)C H O . ½
2 4 4 6
H O] 0.35 g per 100 ml (stable for 2 months in amber glass bottle)
2
• Orthophosphate standard stock solution: sodium thiosulphate pentahydrate (Na S O .
2 2 3
5H O) 1.2 g in 100 ml water, stabilised with 0.05 g of anhydrous sodium carbonate
2
(Na CO ) as preservative
2 3
• Potassium peroxodisulphate: (K S O ) 5 g per 100 ml (stable for 2 weeks in amber
2 2 8
glass borosilicate bottle)
Procedure
All glassware (including sampling bottles) must be washed with hydrochloric acid (1.12 g
ml-1) at 40-50 °C and thoroughly rinsed. Do not use detergents containing phosphates
and preferably use the glassware only for the determination of phosphorus.
For measuring orthophosphate:
1. Filter samples with pre-washed filters; discard the first 10 ml of filtrate, collect 5-40 ml
(depending on concentrations expected).
2. Carry out a blank test with distilled water, using all of the reagents and performing the
same procedure as for the samples.
3. Prepare orthophosphate calibration solutions in the concentration range of the
samples (e.g. from 0.05 to 0.5 mg l-1) with a volumetric pipette in 50 ml volumetric flasks
(filling them only up to about 40 ml).
4. Transfer samples into 50 ml volumetric flasks with volumetric pipettes. Depending on
expected concentrations, use 5-40 ml of sample, fill up to about 40 ml with distilled water.
5. Add, while swirling, first 1 ml ascorbic acid solution and then 2 ml acid molybdate
solution, fill flask up to the 50 ml mark with distilled water and mix well.
6. After 10-30 minutes, measure absorbance at 880 nm using distilled water in the
reference cell.
7. Plot absorbance of calibration solutions against their concentration and determine
slope; check for linearity. Run an independently-prepared calibration solution with each
series of samples, but especially when new batches of reagents are used.
8. Occasionally dean the glassware used for developing the colour complex with sodium
hydroxide solution to remove colour deposits.
For measuring total, particulate and dissolved organic phosphorus:
1. Clean digestion vessels with about 50 ml of water and 2 ml of sulphuric acid (1.84 g
ml-1) in autoclave for 30 minutes at 115-120 °C, cool and rinse, repeat procedure several
times, store covered.
2. Carry out a blank test with distilled water, using all of the reagents and performing the
same procedure as for the samples.
3. Add 1 ml of sulphuric acid (4.5 mol l-1) to 100 ml of sample to adjust pH to about 1
(further adjustment with sulphuric acid or sodium hydroxide solution (2 mol l-1).
4. Pipette 5-40 ml of sample into digestion vessel, add 4 ml of potassium
peroxodisulphate solution, mineralise in autoclave (or pressure cooker), or boil gently for
30 minutes.
5. Cool, adjust pH to between 3 and 10 with sodium hydroxide solution or sulphuric acid
(2 mol l-1), transfer to 50 ml flask and proceed as above for orthophosphate.
If large quantities of organic matter are present, oxidation with nitric acid-sulphuric acid
may be necessary. Furthermore, arsenate may cause interference (see ISO, 1998a).
The test report should contain complete sample identification, reference to the method
used, the results obtained and any further details likely to have influence on the results.
12.5.2 Analysis of nitrate
Several methods for determination of nitrate have been provided by the ISO, the
simplest being a spectrometric measurement of the yellow compound formed by reaction
of sulphosalicylic acid with nitrate and subsequent treatment with alkali (ISO, 1988). The
equipment required is a spectrometer operating at a wavelength of 415 nm and optical
path length of 40-50 mm, evaporating dishes, a water bath capable of accepting six or
more dishes, and a water bath capable of thermostatic regulation to 25 °C. This method
is suitable for surface and potable water samples and has a detection limit of 0.003 to
0.013 mg l-1 (depending on optical equipment). Interference from a range of substances,
particularly chloride, orthophosphate, magnesium and manganese (III) is possible.
Interference problems can be avoided with other spectrometric methods ISO (1986a,b).
12.5.3 Analysis of ammonia
A manual spectrometric method is given by ISO (1984a) which analyses a blue
compound formed by the reaction of ammonium with salicylate and hypochlorite ions in
the presence of sodium nitrosopentacyanoferrate (III) at a limit of detection of 0.003-
0.008 mg l-1. An automated procedure is given by ISO (1986c). A distillation and titration
method is given by ISO (1984b).
12.6 References
Anagnostidis, K. and Komárek, J. 1988 Modern approach to the classification system of
cyanophytes. Archiv Hydrobiol., Supplement 80, Algological Studies, 50-53, 327-472.
Ballantine, D. 1953 Comparison of different methods of estimating nanoplankton. J. Mar.
Biol. Ass. UK, 32, 129-147.
Box J.D. 1981 Enumeration of cell concentrations in suspensions of colonial freshwater
microalgae, with particular reference to Microcystis aeruginosa. Brit. Phycol. J., 16, 153-
164.
ISO 1984a Water Quality - Determination of Ammonium - Part 1: Manual spectrometric
method. ISO 7150-1, International Organization for Standardization, Geneva.
ISO 1984b Water Quality - Determination of Ammonium - Distillation and titration method.
ISO 5664, International Organization for Standardization, Geneva.
ISO 1986a Water Quality - Determination of Nitrate - Part 1: 2,6-Dimethylphenol
spectrometric method. ISO 7890-1, International Organization for Standardization,
Geneva.
ISO 1986b Water Quality - Determination of Nitrate - Part 2: 4-Fluorophenol
spectrometric method after distillation. ISO 7890-2, International Organization for
Standardization, Geneva.
ISO 1986c Water Quality - Determination of Ammonium - Part 2: Automated
spectrometric method. ISO 7150-2, International Organization for Standardization,
Geneva.
ISO 1988 Water Quality - Determination of Nitrate - Part 3: Spectrometric method using
sulfosalicylic acid. ISO 7890-3, International Organization for Standardization, Geneva.
ISO 1998a Water Quality - Spectrometric determination of phosphorus using ammonium
molybdate. ISO/FDIS 6878, International Organization for Standardization, Geneva.
ISO 1992 Water Quality - Measurement of biochemical parameters. Spectrometric
determination of the chlorophyll-a concentrations. ISO 10260, International Organization
for Standardization, Geneva.
Komárek, J. and Anagnostidis, K. 1986 Modern approach to the classification system of
cyanophytes. Archiv Hydrobiol., Supplement 73, Algological Studies, 43, 157-164.
Koroleff, F. 1983 Determination of phosphorus. In: K. Grasshoff, M. Ehrhardt and K.
Kremling [Eds] Methods of Seawater Analysis. Verlag Chemie, Weinheim, Deerfield
Beach, FL, Basel, 125-139.
Utermöhl, H. 1958 Zur Vervollkommnung der quantitative Phytoplankton-Methodik. Mitt.
int. Verein. theor. angew. Limnol. 5, 567-596.
Walsby, A.E. 1992 The control of gas-vacuolated Cyanobacteria. In: D.W. Sutcliffe and
G. Jones [Eds] Eutrophication: Research and Application to Water Supply. Freshwater
Biological Association, Windermere, 143-162.
Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health consequences,
monitoring and management
Edited by Ingrid Chorus and Jamie Bartram
© 1999 WHO
ISBN 0-419-23930-8
Chapter 13. LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF
CYANOTOXINS
This chapter was prepared by Ken-ichi Harada, Fumio Kondo and Linda Lawton
There is a diverse range of laboratory methods used to detect and identify cyanotoxins
in water and cyanobacterial cells. These methods can vary greatly in their degree of
sophistication and the information they provide. Relatively simple low cost methods can
be employed which evaluate rapidly the potential hazard and allow management
decisions to be taken. In contrast, highly sophisticated analytical techniques can be
employed which determine precisely the identity and quantity of cyanotoxins.
Techniques can be selected depending on the facilities and expertise available, coupled
with the type of information required. For example, analysis of water for recreational
purposes may only require detection of potentially harmful cyanobacteria, whereas
ensuring potable water does not exceed guideline levels for cyanotoxins may require
highly specialised equipment and expertise. Information obtained from simple, rapid
screening methods such as microscopic examination can be used to make an informed
decision on the type of bioassay or physicochemical technique which should be
employed. It is important to remember that, currently, there is no single method which
can be adopted which will provide adequate monitoring for all cyanotoxins in the
increasing range of sample types which have to be evaluated. Selectivity and sensitivity
are important criteria for the selection of methods. Figure 13.1 compares three biological
and six chemical methods with respect to these criteria.
13.1 Sample handling and storage
When samples arrive in the laboratory, the type of analysis that will be carried out should
have been anticipated previously. Full consideration should be given to the type of
information required prior to sample collection (see Chapters 10 and 11). However, this
is not always possible, particularly when a routine monitoring programme is not in place.
Information obtained from the microscopic examination of the cyanobacterial taxa
(Chapter 12) may also influence the choice of analysis but this information is not usually
available until samples have reached the laboratory. Many samples will therefore require
immediate evaluation on arrival in the laboratory to determine if any pre-treatment is
needed prior to appropriate sample storage.
Figure 13.1 Relationship between sensitivity and selectivity of analytical methods
for microcystins (see text for explanation of methods)
Samples for cyanotoxin analysis should be refrigerated in the dark to prevent toxin
degradation but it is essential that storage be kept to a minimum (preferably less than 24
hours). Where prolonged storage is required, samples can be frozen, although this will
release toxins from the cells and only the total amount of toxin in the sample can then be
determined. It is often desirable, especially for water treatment purposes, to estimate the
amount of toxin contained within cells as well as that which is dissolved in the water.
Where this information is required, samples should be gently filtered as soon as
practically possible and if necessary the filters and filtrate can be refrigerated or frozen.
A concentration step for cyanobacterial cells can be useful especially for less sensitive
cyanotoxin assay methods. This can be achieved at the sampling location with the use
of a plankton net or by using lakeside filtration apparatus (Chapter 12). In the laboratory,
concentration can be achieved by allowing buoyant cells to accumulate in the upper part
of a separating funnel which enables excess water to be removed. This method can
concentrate cells by at least ten fold but is dependent on cells being vacuolate (i.e.
floating). It may also lead to a bias if most of the cells do not accumulate at the surface
because floating cells may have different toxin quotas than cells which do not.
Centrifugation is useful but is often limited by the relatively small volume of laboratory
centrifuge tubes and, furthermore, problems can be encountered when trying to pellet
vacuolate cells. Filtration is increasingly popular because it can allow concentration of
cells by several orders of magnitude and enables the weight of the cell mass to be
determined. The following filtration method can be employed (Figure 13.2).
Apparatus
• Oven/incubator set at 45 °C or freeze-drier
• Vacuum dessicator
• Balance accurate to 0.0001 g
• Glass fibre filters 70 mm, GF/C, 1.2 µm will retain most cyanobacteria but the smaller
pore size of GF/F (0.7 µm) is required for picoplankton cyanobacterial cells.
• Filtration cup and vacuum pump
• Measuring cylinder
• Plastic Petri dishes
Procedure
1. Place filters in dessicator under vacuum, then remove at intervals and weigh. Filters
are ready to use once a constant weight is obtained. It is useful to place each weighed
filter in a separate Petri dish with the weight recorded on the dish. This makes samples
easy to handle and prevents confusion.
2. Mix the water sample by inverting the bottle several times, then measure a known
volume using the measuring cylinder. This volume will differ depending on the
concentration of cells present, because only small volumes of water with a high
concentration of cells can be filtered before the filter becomes blocked.
3. Using one of the pre-weighed filters, filter the water sample and then return the filter to
the labelled Petri dish.
4. Keeping the filter in the Petri dish place it either in the drying oven or freeze-drier. If
using on oven, the temperature must be kept below 50 °C.
5. Once dry, return filters to the dessicator and weigh to constant weight. Calculate the
dry weight of cells collected by subtraction of the initial weight of the filter.
6. Cyanotoxins can either be extracted immediately, or filters may be stored until
required, preferably in a freezer.
By following this procedure it is possible to relate cyanotoxin content to the dry weight of
particulate matter extracted as well as to the volume of water filtered. Sometimes dry
weights are affected by the presence of large particles in the sample (e.g. zooplankton
or feathers from waterfowl). This can easily be overcome by carrying out pre-screening
using a 1-2 mm sieve if necessary. Furthermore, particulate matter (i.e. seston) may
consist of plankton organisms in addition to cyanobacteria (e.g. algae, rotifers, bacteria,
detritus). A brief microscopic check of the fresh sample or a preserved sub-sample (see
Chapter 11) will reveal whether or not the dry weight can be attributed mainly to
cyanobacteria. In dense blooms and scums this is usually the case but, in samples from
more homogenously dispersed situations, other components may dominate and the
relating of the toxins to dry weight will therefore underestimate the toxin content of the
cells. If an accurate balance is not available, the filtration method can be used but the
cyanotoxin content can be related only to the volume of water filtered.
Figure 13.2 Toxin extraction by filtration
Dense cyanobacterial scums or samples concentrated using a plankton net are often
freeze-dried. This provides a dry powder which can easily be weighed prior to extraction.
However, great care must be taken with such dry powders because they can easily
become airborne and may present a health hazard through inhalation.
Most sample handling and storage methods for cyanotoxin analysis have been
evaluated primarily for microcystins, hence the stability of other cyano-toxins may not be
fully understood. It is therefore important to evaluate the chosen method if other
cyanotoxins are being monitored.
13.2 Sample preparation for cyanotoxin determination and
bioassays
13.2.1 Extraction
For cyanotoxin detection, samples may be extracted from cells or biological matrices
such as animal tissue, or water samples. Cells have successfully been extracted in a
number of different liquid phases, and some of the most popular are 5 per cent acetic
acid, methanol, acidified methanol (Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) added), aqueous methanol,
and butanol:methanol:water (1:4:15) (Harada, 1996). The efficiency of these methods
depends on the sample and the cyanotoxins present. It has been found that the more
polar extraction media, such as 5 per cent acetic acid, provide reasonable extraction
efficiency of the more polar microcystins but give very poor recovery of hydrophobic
microcystins (Lawton et al., 1994a). Methanol has been advocated as the most suitable
solvent because it gives good extraction efficiency and has the added advantage of
allowing rapid sample concentration through evaporation. It has since been suggested
that 100 per cent methanol may give poor recovery of more polar microcystins; but the
addition of a small percentage of water overcomes this. Fastner et al. (1998) showed
that, especially for lyophilised field samples dominated by Microcystis spp., extraction
with 75 per cent methanol and 25 per cent water (by weight) was most effective. One
approach which has been used routinely, with success, for microcystins is as follows:
Apparatus
• Rotary evaporation equipment
• Glass beakers, 50 ml
• Measuring cylinder, 20 ml
• Rotary evaporation flasks, 50 ml, pear-shaped
• Pipette, 0.25 ml
• Glass vials or microcentrifuge tubes, ~1 ml.
Reagents
• Methanol, high purity if possible.
• Aqueous methanol (75 per cent, v/v)
Procedure
1. Place each filter containing cells into a glass beaker with 20 ml of either pure
methanol or 75 per cent aqueous methanol. Filters may be cut into small pieces with
scissors but gloves must be worn and care must be taken not to cross contaminate
samples or to lose material sticking to the scissors.
2. Allow filters to extract for 1 hour. If time is limiting, extract for 30 minutes because the
shorter time has been found to reduce only slightly the recovery of microcystins.
3. Decant extract into rotary evaporation flask and dry in vacuo at 45 °C.
4. Add a further 20 ml of extraction solvent to the filter in the beaker and allow to extract
as before.
5. Repeat this process a total of three times, each time decanting the extract into the
same rotary evaporation flask.
6. Add 0.25 ml of methanol to the dry extract in the rotary evaporation flask, mix and
remove the resuspended extract to a glass vial or microcentrifuge tube. Repeat this with
a second 0.25 ml of methanol, placing both aliquots in the same vial or tube.
7. Consideration must be given to the type of analysis which is going to follow extraction
because organic solvents are toxic to bioassay organisms. This can often be overcome
by using a volatile medium, followed by evaporation and resuspension in a medium
which is compatible with the assay method. With very toxic samples and/or sensitive
bioassays, dilution with the assay medium (using a control containing the same per cent
of solvent) is sufficient to obtain non-toxic solvent concentrations.
Two other rapid extraction procedures have also been successfully applied:
• After freezing and thawing to disrupt cells, toxins may be extracted in the filtration
device by passing aqueous methanol or water, followed by methanol, through the filters
by suction (use a total of 5-25 ml of solvent). Extracts can be used directly for analysis or
further concentrated if enhanced sensitivity is needed (Figure 13.2) (Utkilen and Gjølme,
1994). This method requires little equipment other than a filtration device and deep-
freezer.
• Membrane filters with approximately 20 mg of freeze-dried material may be extracted
in 2 ml microcentrifuge tubes by adding 1.5 ml solvent (preferably 75 per cent aqueous
methanol), sonicating, shaking for 30 minutes and centrifuging. This step extracts a large
share of the microcystins, and extraction is more complete if the pellet is re-extracted
twice and the supernatants are pooled (Fastner et al., 1998).
Saxitoxins are often extracted in acidified media including acetic acid, hydrochloric acid
(HCl) and acidified methanol (Fernandez and Cembella, 1995). A recent study found
methanol acidified with TFA was the most efficient solvent when extracting saxitoxin and
neosaxitoxin from cyanobacterial cells (McElhiney et al., 1998). Anatoxin-a has been
successfully extracted with water, acidified water, acidified methanol (Edwards et al.,
1992), chloroform followed by hydrochloric acid (Harada et al., 1989) or by
dichloromethane after an acidification and neutralisation step (Bumke-Vogt et al., 1996).
Box 13.1 When is sample cleanup needed?
Try analysis or bioassays without performing cleanup if:
• Samples are dominated by cyanobacteria; or
• Precise quantification of toxins and complete identification of minor toxin components is less
important than rapid analysis of a larger number of samples.
Introduce cleanup if:
• Cyanobacteria are a minor component of the sample.
• Low concentrations of cyanotoxins are anticipated.
• Identification and quantification is important.
• Chromatograms obtained without cleanup show considerable baseline problems or poor peak
separation.
• Bioassay results suggest influence from further substances.
To store extracts prior to analysis or bioassays, blow to dryness and deepfreeze (-18 °C).
Samples may then be re-dissolved in the solvent at a concentration adequate for the
subsequent chemical analysis or bioassay.
13.2.2 Sample cleanup
The purpose of cleanup is to eliminate impurities by a simple operation without loss of
analyte and where the concentration of cyanotoxins is low, it also enables enrichment of
the analyte. Whether or not cleanup is necessary depends largely on the precision of the
toxin determination and quantification required. Without cleanup, small toxin peaks in
chromatograms may be missed due to masking by other matrix substances eluting
simultaneously, and toxin concentrations may be overestimated if peaks are not clearly
separated from matrix substances. However, for many screening and monitoring
purposes, particularly of bloom samples containing little material other than
cyanobacteria, the carrying out of bioassays or toxin analysis without sample cleanup
has given satisfactory results (see Box 13.1 for criteria when to perform cleanup).
The establishment of a versatile cleanup method would give an additional advantage to
the analysis of microcystins in other matrixes such as biological samples, fish and
shellfish. Furthermore, it would give useful information for preparative separation of
microcystins and their degradation products. Octadecyl silanised (ODS) silica gel has
been employed extensively to facilitate sample cleanup and trace enrichment of
microcystins and nodularin because it retains the toxins and allows interference
compounds to pass through (Lawton et al., 1994a; Harada, 1996).
Concentration and cleanup method for microcystins and nodularins in water samples
Apparatus
• Porcelain filter funnel, 110 mm diameter and Buchner flask, 1 litre or similar
• Filter disks, GP/C, 110 mm
• Measuring cylinder, 500 ml
• Pipettes, various
• Water vacuum pump
• Glass bottles, 500 ml
• Vacuum manifold
• Solid phase extraction cartridges, 1 g trifunctional, end-capped C18
• PTFE tubing and cartridge adapters
• Glass sample tubes
• Drying hot block (45 °C) with blow-down nitrogen
• Microcentrifuge tube (1.5 ml)
Reagents
• Sodium thiosulphate solution, 1 g Na O .5H O made up to 100 ml with distilled water
2 3 2
• Aqueous methanol, solutions containing 10, 20 and 30 per cent methanol in water
• Trifluoroacetic acid solution, 10 per cent TFA v/v in water
• Trifluoroacetic acid solution, 0.1 per cent TFA v/v in methanol
• Methanol
• Water
Note: all reagents should be analytical quality
Procedure
1. Mix the water sample by inverting the container several times, then measure a 500 ml
portion of the sample and filter it gently through a GF/C filter disc. The filter can be
retained and extracted as described above to determine the particulate microcystin
concentration.
2. Add 0.1 ml sodium thiosulphate solution to eliminate free residual chlorine. Shake the
water sample vigorously and let it stand for a few minutes, then add 5 ml of the 10 per
cent TFA and mix before passing the sample through a GF/C filter disc.
3. Place the sample in a 500 ml glass bottle, add 5 ml methanol and mix. The sample is
now ready for solid phase extraction (SPE).
4. Solid phase extraction cartridges are prepared by attaching them to the vacuum
manifold system and then conditioning them with 10 ml methanol followed by 10 ml
water, ensuring that the cartridge does not become dry at any time. The methanol and
water eluates are discarded.
5. Using PTFE tubing and adapter, attach a tube from the bottle containing the water
sample to the top of the SPE cartridge. The vacuum draws the sample through the
tubing and through the cartridge. The water is not collected but allowed to run to waste
through the water pump.
6. Once all of the water sample has passed through it, the cartridge is washed with 10 ml
of the 10 per cent methanol followed by 10 ml of the 20 per cent methanol and then
finally washed with 10 ml of the 30 per cent methanol. The eluate from the three washes
is discarded.
7. The cartridge is eluted with 3 ml of 0.1 per cent TFA in methanol. This is collected in a
sample tube and dried on a hot block (45 °C) under a gentle stream of nitrogen gas.
8. Samples are resuspended in 0.1 ml methanol and placed in a microcentrifuge tube. A
further 0.1 ml of methanol is used to rinse the sample tube and this is combined with the
first aliquot.
9. This sample can now be analysed or it can be dried and stored in the freezer until
required.
10. It is recommended that this procedure is carried out in duplicate for each water
sample analysed.
Figure 13.3 HPLC profiles of water samples containing microcystins.
A. A toxic fraction from a bloom sample and of fractions from lake water (1 µg
each of microcystin-RR, -YR, -LR added);
B. Before cleanup with silica gel cartridge;
C. After cleanup with silica gel cartridge
Notes
• Different systems can be used to pass the water sample through the SPE cartridge but
a specially designed vacuum manifold apparatus is available for use with SPE cartridges.
Most of these systems are designed so that a number of cartridges can be attached at
one time (e.g. 10 or 20). Automated systems are also available, and peristaltic pumps
have also been used successfully, but are not as practical.
• It is vitally important that all apparatus used is thoroughly cleaned to ensure no
external contamination. Equipment used for trace enrichment should be dedicated to this
procedure only, in order to reduce the opportunities for contamination.
Some modifications to the single SPE method have been proposed with promising
results. Figure 13.3A shows the High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC)
chromatogram of a toxic fraction from a cyanobacterial bloom sample; the microcystins
have been detected with limited interference. However, this method is not always
effective for analysis of the toxins in raw water samples because of the occurrence of
serious background peaks as shown in Figure 13.3B. To eliminate effectively the
impurities, Tsuji et al. (1994) established a tandem cleanup method using ODS silica gel
and silica gel cartridges as follows. The water sample was first applied to an ODS silica
gel cartridge and the desired fraction was eluted with 90 per cent aqueous methanol.
Next, the resultant eluate, in 100 per cent methanol, was applied to a silica gel cartridge.
After washing with methanol, the toxin-containing fraction was obtained by elution with
10 per cent water-0.1 per cent TFA in methanol. Figure 13.3C shows the chromatogram
after the silica gel cleanup, indicating that most of the impurities can be removed. Tsuji
et al. (1996) used HPLC with ultra violet (UV) detection and Liquid
Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (LC/MS) combined with this tandem cleanup
system to report the intracellular and extracellular microcystin levels between 1992 and
1995 for Japanese lakes. Microcystins-LR, -YR and -RR were detected at 0.02-2.64 µg l-
1 in cell-free water and at 0.02-378 µg l-1 in the cells during this period.
Recently, an immunoaffinity purification method has been developed using an anti-
microcystin-LR monoclonal antibody (Kondo et al., 1996). This cleanup method was
found to be remarkably effective in the removal of contaminants in the hepatic cytosol
and enabled the analysis of microcystins and their metabolites, formed in vivo in mouse
and rat livers, by HPLC and Frit-FAB LC/MS. Figure 13.4 shows the HPLC profiles of a
cytosolic extract from mouse liver spiked with 5 µg each of microcystins-RR and -LR.
Before the immunoaffinity purification, the spiked microcystins could not be accurately
quantified due to the many impurities (Figure 13.4A), whereas after the immunoaffinity
purification, the impurities were effectively eliminated and the peaks of the microcystins
were clearly detected (Figure 13.4B). Although this immunoaffinity column is not
commercially available, it has the potential to enable significant progress in a number of
important areas of research; for example in metabolism studies and in elucidation of the
fate of microcystins in the environment.
Research into appropriate cleanup methods for other cyanotoxins has still to be carried
out, although a similar approach to that which has been developed for microcystins may
prove useful.
13.3 Toxicity tests and bioassays
There have been many biological detection methods developed for cyanotoxins that use
the bioactivity of the toxins (Table 13.1), such as potent hepatotoxicity, neurotoxicity,
cytotoxicity, enzymatic activity and immunological interactions. However, for many years,
the mouse bioassay alone has been used to determine bloom toxicity. Although this
bioassay provides a measure of the total toxicity (response) within a few hours, it is
generally not very sensitive or specific. Considerable research efforts have been made
to find suitable alternative methods to the mouse bioassay as a routine monitoring assay
for cyanotoxins and many novel and sensitive methods have become available in recent
years. However, no single method is currently available to replace the mouse for the
detection of all cyanotoxins using a single assay, and further validation and comparison
of methods is needed before general recommendations on their application can be given
(see also Box 13.2).
Figure 13.4 HPLC profiles of a cytosolic extract from mouse liver spiked with 5 µg each
of microcystin-RR and -LR.
A. Extract after heat-denaturation, pronase digestion, and ODS silica gel cleanup;
B. Extract after further immunoaffinity purification
Different bioassays are described below. Users are advised to test their suitability for
locally-prevalent cyanotoxins with other methods, such as chemical toxin analysis (see
section 13.4). Sensitivity and selectivity are important criteria for the selection of
methods. Figure 13.1 shows the sensitivity of three different biological methods in
relation to six methods of chemical analysis.
13.3.1 Mouse bioassay
Male Swiss Albino mice are the most used animals for toxicity testing for cyanotoxins.
Toxicity is tested by intraperitoneal injection (i.p.) of 0.1-1.0 ml of a lysate of
cyanobacteria prepared either by sonication or by freeze-thawing of a cell suspension
which has been sterilized by membrane ultra-filtration. Samples can be suspended in
water or physiological saline solution which is preferred if the volume to be injected is 0.5
ml or greater.
Table 13.1 Bioassays for the detection of cyanotoxins
Cost2
Method Toxins1 Comments Reference(s)
Cap. Con. Pers.
Vertebrate
Mouse M,N,A, Requires licence, not permitted Falconer, 1993
A(s),C,S in some countries
Invertebrate
Brine shrimp M,N L L(H) M Commercial kit available but Kiviranta et al.,
increases cost 1991;
Campbell et al.,
1994
Daphnia sp. M,N L L H Culturing is labour intensive Lawton et al.,
1994b
Thamnotox M,A,C(?) L H M Commercial kit available but Kozma, 1997
requires full evaluation for
cyanotoxins
Mosquito M L L M Difficult to handle Kiviranta et al.,
1993
Fruitfly M,N L L L Easy to culture Swoboda et al.,
1994
Locust S L M L Easy to handle McElhiney et al.,
1998
House fly S L L L Difficult to administer toxin Ross et al., 1985
Bacterial
Microtox M,N H H L No correlation Lawton et al.,
1994b
Serratia sp. M,S L L M Poor correlation Lawton et al.,
1994b
Biochemical
PPase M,N Very sensitive
inhibition
Radioactive M M L Requires special facilities Holmes, 1991
Colorimetric L/M M L Requires purified enzyme An and
Carmichael, 1994
AChE A(s) L/M L L Only alternative bioassay for Mahmood and
A(s) may react with OP3 Carmichael, 1987
pesticides
ELISA Very sensitive
Polyclonal M,N M H L Reactivity for variants may vary Chu et al., 1989
Monoclonal M,N M H L Reactivity for variants may vary Ueno et al., 1996
Polyclonal S M H L Variable cross-reactivity, does Cembella et al.,
not detect C-toxins 1995
Mammalian cells
Hepatocytes M,N M M M Sensitive and rapid bioassay Heinze, 1996
V79 fibroblasts M H H H Some false negatives observed Lawton et al.,
1994b
Neuroblastoma S H H H Requires careful Cembella et al.,
standardisation 1995;
Gallacher and
Birkbeck, 1992
ELISA Enzyme linked immuno sorbent assay
AChE Acetylcholinesterase
1 M Microcystins; N Nodularins; A Anatoxin-a A(s) Anatoxin-a(S); C Cylindrospermosin;
S Saxitoxin
2 Cap. Capital; Con. Consumable; Pers. Personnel; L Low; M Medium; H High
3 OP Organophosphorus
Box 13.2 When are bioassays needed?
Bioassays are recommended if any of these conditions are fulfilled:
• A laboratory can easily establish them, but has little or no access to adequate equipment and
expertise for establishing physicochemical analysis, or little means of subcontracting analysis.
• There is indication of cyanotoxins other than (or in addition to) the known toxicants.
• Cyanobacterial taxa dominate, the toxins of which have not yet been well studied and which
may therefore contain unknown toxic metabolites.
• Confirmation of results from physicochemical analysis is required, especially to confirm
bioactivity.
• Validation of physicochemical methods by an alternative method is desired.
Mice should be observed for 24 h and then killed by an approved method (Falconer,
1993). The observation period must be extended to seven days where
cylindrospermopsin is suspected and animals should be injected with sterile samples.
This toxin demonstrates protracted symptoms which result from progressive organ
failure, specifically liver and kidneys. At the end of the observation period post-mortem
examination of tissue injury is performed. The observed symptoms and the results of the
post-mortem are used to determine which cyanotoxin is present (see Chapter 3 and 4 for
toxicology). However, where more than one type of cyanotoxin is present, the more
rapid-acting toxin may mask other symptoms.
Toxicity is expressed as LD mg cell dry weight per kg mouse body weight. Values are
50
classified as follows (Lawton et al. 1994b):
> 1,000 non toxic
500-1,000 low toxicity
100-500 medium toxicity
< 100 high toxicity
Note that in some countries non-toxic limits may be at least 2,000 mg cell dry weight per
kg mouse body weight.
13.3.2 Invertebrate bioassays
A number of invertebrates have been investigated for use in routine bioassays for
cyanotoxins. Of these, the brine shrimp (Artemia salina) has been the most popular,
because no culture maintenance or specialist equipment is required. Brine shrimps have
been exploited for many years for the detection of toxic secondary metabolites and are
now commercially available as standardised test kits (although use of the kits increases
the cost of performing the assay). Brine shrimp eggs are readily available from biological
supply companies and can be stored for several years at -20 °C without loss of viability.
Brine shrimp bioassay
Apparatus
• Conical flasks, glass, 250 ml
• Microtitre plates, 96-well
• Incubator, 25 °C
• Desk lamp
• Pasteur pipette and bulb
• Pipette, 0.1 ml
• Universal bottle, 25 ml
• Dissecting microscope with low power objective
Reagents
• Brine shrimp eggs, stored in freezer
• Brine shrimp medium (BSM) stock solution, composed of:
Sodium chloride (NaCl) 300 g
Calcium chloride dihydrate (CaCl.2H O) 3 g
2
Magnesium chloride hexahydrate (MgCl .6H O) 15 g
2 2
Magnesium sulphate heptahydrate (MgSO .7H O) 5 g
4 2
Potassium chloride (KCl) 8 g
Glycine 60 g
Disodium glycerophosphate 30 g
• Methanol or formalin
The stock solution chemicals are dissolved in 1.25 litres of distilled water, dissolving
each chemical separately in the order shown. It is important to add the disodium
glycerophosphate last to prevent an insoluble precipitate occurring. The stock solution
should be stored in a brown glass bottle in the refrigerator (~4 °C).
Procedure
1. Mix 20 ml of BSM stock solution with 140 ml distilled water in a 250 ml conical flask.
2. Add 100 mg of brine shrimp eggs and incubate at 25 °C until they hatch (usually 36-
48 hours). Once a regular hatching time has been established try to keep it constant.
3. Separate the hatched larvae from unhatched eggs and egg cases by transferring
them into a shallow dish, e.g. Petri dish or slightly deeper.
4. Position a desk lamp to one side of the dish and allow the larvae to concentrate
towards the light.
5. Using a Pasteur pipette carefully, using slow steady suction on the pipette bulb,
collect the hatched larvae.
6. Place larvae in a universal bottle and repeat the collection process until most of the
hatched larvae have been collected.
7. If a substantial number of unhatched eggs have been collected in error, the separation
can be repeated by placing the collected larvae in a clean dish and illuminating.
8. Using a mechanical pipette with plastic tips (first use a sharp blade to remove the first
few mm of the tip) pipette 0.1 ml of the larvae suspension into a microtitre well. Make
sure the larvae suspension is regularly mixed because they tend to cluster rapidly in the
bottle. Mixing is easier if the bottle is only half full.
9. Examine the well containing larvae under the microscope to determine the
approximate number of larvae in 0.1 ml. Ideally this should be between 15 and 25 larvae.
Dilute the sample with fresh media if the larvae are too concentrated. Repeat the
pipetting a few times to ensure reasonably reproducible numbers of larvae are being
deposited in each well and that they are alive and look healthy.
10. Fill as many wells with larvae suspension as will be required to carry out the
bioassay.
11. To determine the toxicity of cyanobacterial cells, the sample must first be extracted.
This can be done as described above (section 13.2.1) from filter discs, but if the final
extract is in methanol it must be diluted in BSM so that the final concentration of
methanol does not exceed 5 per cent in the test well.
12. A dilution series of each sample should be prepared and 0.1 ml of the test solution
added to the larvae in the wells in triplicate. The microtitre plate is then incubated for 18
hours at 25 °C after which the percentage mortality is calculated.
13. First, with the help of a microscope, count the number of dead or immobilised larvae
in each well, then add a few drops of formalin or methanol and wait until all the larvae
are dead. Now count the total number of larvae in each well and calculate the
percentage mortality using a mean of the three replicates.
14. By plotting the concentration of cyanobacteria against the percentage mortality the
LC value (i.e. the concentration of cell extract which caused 50 per cent mortality) for
50
each sample can be determined.
Notes
• Care must be taken to exclude particulate material from the assay and therefore
extracts must be filtered or centrifuged.
• High concentrations of cell extract cause false positives, probably due to oxygen
depletion caused by the activity of bacteria, therefore sample cleanup (see section
13.2.2) is necessary to detect low concentrations of toxin successfully. Sample cleanup,
e.g. the use of SPE, can also enhance the specificity of the assay because it selectively
concentrates microcystins and nodularins, reducing interference by other compounds.
When 21 hepatotoxic bloom samples were assessed by this assay the results compared
very favourably with both mouse bioassay and HPLC (Lawton et al., 1994b). This assay
has not been fully evaluated for toxins other than microcystins, although there does
appear to be a correlation between anatoxin-a content and toxicity.
Daphnia bioassays can successfully detect microcystins, although standardised culturing
is extremely labour intensive (Baird et al., 1989). A commercially prepared test kit,
similar to the brine shrimp assay in that it uses the resting stage of an aquatic
invertebrate, Thamnocephalus platyurus has been found to be sensitive to a number of
cyanotoxins (Kozma, 1997). These kits are relatively expensive and have a limited shelf-
life (6 months), although the standardised format of this bioassay leads to highly
reproducible results and low inter-laboratory variability (Kozma, 1997). The use of
mosquito adults and larvae have both been investigated as potential bioassays (Turell
and Middlebrook, 1988; Kiviranta et al., 1993). Adults were injected and larvae
immersed in aqueous extracts. Both methods were relatively sensitive but have not been
widely adopted due to the difficulties of handling this organism. The other insect which
has been shown to detect microcystins successfully in bloom samples is the fruit fly
(Drosophila melanogaster) (Swoboda et al., 1994). These organisms are easy to
maintain in the laboratory, with no special equipment required. Toxin is administered
orally by adding filter discs spotted with sample plus sucrose to tubes containing pre-
starved (24 h) flies. The flies were not, however, sensitive to neurotoxic Aphanizomenon
(Swoboda et al., 1994).
Two invertebrate assays have been investigated for the detection of saxitoxins. Firstly,
adult house flies injected with purified toxins and natural samples (shellfish extracts)
gave results which compared well with toxicity determined by mouse. However, the flies
are difficult to handle and require microinjection (1.5 µl) which is difficult to administer
(Ross et al., 1985). A locust bioassay has recently been found to detect saxitoxins
successfully in a range of samples, namely cyanobacteria and shellfish (McElhiney et al.,
1998). Locusts are easy to handle because they can be readily immobilised by holding
their rear legs. Samples are administered by injection (10 µl) and results are obtained
within 90 minutes (McElhiney et al., 1998). The LD for pure saxitoxin was 8 µg g-1 but
50
the bioassay was not sensitive to microcystin-LR or anatoxin-a.
Locust bioassay for saxitoxins
Apparatus
• 10-25 pi syringe, e.g. type used for GC analysis
• Desert locust (Schistocerca gregaria), male early fifth instar
• Plastic container, 500 ml, foil covered with a number of small air holes
Reagents
• Simple saline, 7.5 g sodium chloride (NaCl) and 0.37 g potassium chloride (KCl)
dissolved in 1 litre distilled water
Procedure
1. Prepare a dilution series in simple saline of the test sample. It has been found that
saxitoxins can be extracted well from cyanobacterial cells with acidified methanol (TFA
added). Samples can be dried then resuspended in saline for use in the bioassay.
2. Pick up locust by hind legs and inject 10 pi along the abdomen, (parallel to the body)
between the second and third segment. Inject three locusts for each concentration and
inject controls with saline only.
3. Place each locust in a clear plastic container and observe for 90 minutes.
4. Death or the inability to self-right when placed on their back is recorded as a positive
result.
5. The time of death is an indication of saxitoxin concentration.
13.3.3 Bacterial bioassays
Bacterial bioassays have been investigated to determine if they can provide simple
routine methods for cyanotoxin detection. The one that has received the most attention
is the Microtox bioluminescence assay which indicates toxicity by a reduction in the light
emitted by the test bacterium (Photobacterium phosphoreum). Initial investigations
suggested that this system may be suitable for the rapid detection of microcystins in
bloom samples (Lawton et al., 1990) although more detailed analysis revealed that the
assay responded to unknown components of cyanobacterial extracts other than
microcystins (Campbell et al., 1994). Several studies have now been published that
clearly indicate there is no correlation between response in the Microtox assay and
cellular content of the known cyanotoxins (Lawton et al., 1994b; Vezie et al., 1996).
A second bacterial bioassay which used the inhibition of pigment (prodigiosin) formation
in Serratia marcescens as an indication of toxicity has been proposed by Dierstein et al.
(1989). This bioassay was thought to be useful for saxitoxins and microcystins. However,
like the Microtox system, little correlation was found between actual content of known
cyanotoxins and inhibition of pigment formation (Lawton et al., 1994b).
13.3.4 Biochemical assays
The protein phosphatase inhibition assay is a sensitive screening method for
microcystins and nodularins which uses the biochemical activity of these toxins. One
version is based on the quantitation of 32P-phosphate released from a radiolabelled
substrate (Holmes, 1991; Lambert et al., 1994) by the activity of the protein phosphatase
enzyme (PP1 and PP2A). It is sensitive to sub-nanogram levels of microcystin and is a
rapid assay allowing the analysis of many samples in a few hours. The method has been
applied to detect microcystin class compounds in the marine environment, to extracts of
liver tissue taken from Atlantic salmon afflicted with netpen liver disease (Andersen et al.,
1993) and to hydrophobic microcystins from freshwater cyanobacteria (Craig et al.,
1993). The method has also been successfully used for quantitation of microcystins in
drinking water before and after water treatment (Lambert et al., 1994). The detected
amounts in raw and treated waters were estimated to be 0.12-0.87 and 0.09-0.18 µg l-1,
respectively. Although this method has been widely used in research, there is a
reluctance in adopting it for the routine monitoring of microcystins because of the
requirement to use radioactivity which necessitates specialised laboratory equipment
and regulations.
An and Carmichael (1994) have used a colorimetric protein phosphatase inhibition assay
which avoids the complications of using radioactive materials. Isobe et al. (1995)
reported a firefly bioluminescence system for the detection of protein phosphatase 2A
inhibitors, in which luciferin phosphate is hydrolysed to luciferin and inorganic phosphate
by protein phosphatase 2A. The use of the protein phosphatase inhibition assay is
extremely helpful to confirm biological activity, and hence toxicity, of microcystins in
environmental samples. The non-radioactive bioassay may therefore be Used
increasingly for the routine screening of water samples, as shown recently by Ward et al.
(1997).
The biochemical activity of anatoxin-a(S) can be exploited in an enzyme-based assay to
detect the inhibition of acetylcholinesterase (AChE), thereby providing an indication of
the presence of this toxin (Mahmood and Carmichael, 1987). This is a sensitive method
and is the only alternative to the mouse bioassay currently available for this toxin. The
assay is not selective because it will also detect other toxicants, such as
organophosphorus-based pesticides.
13.3.5 Immunological detection
The Enzyme-Linked Immuno Sorbent Assay (ELISA) technique is currently the most
promising method for rapid sample screening for microcystins because of its sensitivity,
specificity and ease of operation. Monoclonal antibodies raised against microcystin-LA
were initially developed by Kfir et al. (1986) and offered a simple approach to a general
immunoassay for microcystins. An ELISA technique was subsequently developed by
Chu et al. (1989) as a practical method. This assay is based on polyclonal antisera
raised in rabbits against bovine serum albumin conjugated to microcystin-LR. The
antisera showed good cross-reactivity with microcystins-LR, -RR, -YR and nodularin, but
less with -LY and -LA. The sensitivity of the assay showed approximately 50 per cent
binding at a toxin concentration of 1 ng ml-1 which is appropriate for normal water quality
testing. In fact, this method has been successfully employed for quantitation of
cyanobacterial hepatotoxins in domestic water supplies and biomass extracts with
detection limits of 0.2 µg l-1 and 0.25 µg g-1 for water and biomass samples, respectively
(Chu et al., 1990).
Recently, Nagata et al. (1995) produced six monoclonal antibodies against microcystin-
LR. Among them, M8H5 antibody showed cross-reactivity with microcystin-RR (106 per
cent), microcystin-YR (44 per cent), microcystin-LA (26 per cent), [D-Asp3]microcystin-LR
(51 per cent), [Dha7] microcystin-LR (48 per cent), glutathione conjugate of microcystin-
LR (47 per cent), monomethyl ester of microcystin-LR (30 per cent), nodularin (46 per
cent) and 6(Z)-ADDA microcystin-LR (< 4 per cent). Although the epitope of this antibody
is not clear, the importance of the Adda moiety for antibody binding has been indicated.
It should be noted that this antibody also reacts to the non-toxic monomethyl ester of
microcystin-LR giving a false positive from the toxicological point of view. Using this
monoclonal antibody, a more sensitive competitive ELISA method has been developed
by Ueno et al. (1996) with detection limits of 0.05 µg l-1 for water samples. This method
has been successfully applied to detect microcystins in drinking water in China (Box
13.3).
Box 13.3 Application of the ELISA method to the detection of microcystins in drinking
water in China
Using an ELISA method, Ueno et al. (1996) analysed microcystin concentrations in drinking water
collected in Haimen and Fusui in China, where the rates of primary liver cancer (PLC) do not
correlate with PLC-causing agents such as aflatoxin and hepatitis-B virus. It had also been
observed that people who drank pond and ditch water had a higher risk of PLC than people who
drank well water. The authors investigated the levels of microcystins in four types of water
(pond/ditch, river, shallow well and deep well) collected from 989 different sampling sites in
Haimen. The results showed a positive detection of microcystin for 17,32,4 and 0 per cent of the
total samples of pond/ditch, river, shallow well and deep well water, respectively. The average
microcystin concentration in the pond/ditch and river water were 101 and 160 pg ml-1,
respectively, which were significantly higher than those of the shallow and deep well water.
Among the samples examined, two samples from the river showed microcystin levels over 1,000
pg ml-1. These data suggested that microcystin in drinking water from ponds/ditches and rivers, or
both, is one of the risk factors for the high incidence of PLC in China. Furthermore, the results
indicate that ELISA can be applied successfully to the monitoring of microcystins in environmental
samples.
Commercially, a polyclonal ELISA kit is available for microcystins. The antibodies are
fixed to the walls of the wells of a microtitre plate. The first step involves binding of the
calibrators (a non-toxic microcystin-LR surrogate at 0.1, 0.4 and 1.6 µg l-1) a negative
control and the samples to the antibodies in the wells. This is followed by addition of a
microcystin-enzyme conjugate which binds to the remaining antibodies. After thorough
rinsing, the concentration of bound enzyme is measured colourimetrically in an ELISA
plate reader. The microcystin concentration is inversely proportional to the colour
intensity.
ELISA method for microcystins
Apparatus
• Filtration equipment for samples containing particles
• Automatic 100 µl pipette
• Timer
• Multichannel pipette for washing the microtitre plate
• Apparatus for shaking the microtitre plate
• ELISA reader with filter at 450 nm
Reagents
• ELISA test kit
• Distilled water
Procedure
1. Water samples to be analysed are treated twice by freeze-thawing followed by
filtration through membrane or glass fibre filters.
2. Samples or standards are first mixed with antibody (M8H5) solution and then added to
a 96-well microtitre plate that is pre-coated with a microcystin-LR bovine serum albumin
conjugate.
3. After washing, bound monoclonal antibody is detected with horseradish peroxidase-
labelled goat anti-mouse IgG and its substrate (0.1 mg ml-1 of 3,3',5,5'-
tetramethlybenzidine, 0.005 per cent H O in citrate buffer).
2 2
4. The optical density is measured at 450 nm and the microcystin concentration
determined from a standard competitive curve of microcystin-LR.
Development of immunodiagnostic systems for the detection of saxitoxins have primarily
been aimed at replacing the mouse bioassay for the routine monitoring of shellfish from
the marine environment and are discussed in more detail elsewhere (Cembella et al.,
1995). Both polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies have been produced, although none
have shown cross-reactivity with all the known variants. Antibodies tend to be raised to
saxitoxin mainly because it has been the most extensively studied and because it is also
the most readily available; hence methods reliably detect this variant but most notably
fail to cross-react with neosaxitoxin which is of similar toxicity. Methods continue to be
developed (e.g. Kralovec et al., 1996) and may provide a suitable routine monitoring
system in the future.
13.3.6 Mammalian cells
Bioassays using mammalian cells have received attention as suitable replacements for
mouse toxicity tests. The well documented fact that microcystins have caused acute liver
damage has prompted studies using hepatocytes (liver cells). Freshly isolated rat
hepatocytes were first investigated by Aune and Berg (1986) who reported good
correlation between toxicity measured by leakage of the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) from hepatocytes and results from mouse bioassay. More recently this method
has received renewed interest due to legislative restrictions in the use of the mouse LD
50
(Heinze, 1996). Isolated rat hepatocytes have been incubated with pure toxin or bloom
extracts for 4 h and 20 h and then the viability has been assessed using the MTT ((3,4,5-
dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) test. Toxicity was found to be time-
dependent with the LC for microcystin-LR being 0.20 µg ml-1 at 4 h reduced to 0.05 µg
50
ml-1 after 20 h. Different LC values were found for microcystin variants, most notably
50
microcystin-RR was found to be at least an order of magnitude less toxic in this assay.
This is consistent with in vivo toxicity data.
An in vitro fibroblast cytotoxicity assay for microcystins has been investigated by Codd et
al. (1989) as a replacement for the mouse bioassay. The assay, using V79 hamster
fibroblast cells, responded to microcystins with the results correlating reasonably well
with those of the mouse bioassay (Lawton et al., 1994b). However, the assay
demonstrated a number of false positives and, of more concern, false negatives were
also recorded.
Box 13.4 When is physicochemical analysis needed?
Physicochemical analysis of cyanotoxins is recommended if:
• Cyanobacterial species composition or bioassay results indicate which toxins to look for.
• Unambiguous identification of toxins is required.
• Quantification of toxins is required.
• Rapid screening of a large number of samples is required, especially for regular monitoring of
sites where the toxin patterns are well established.
• Low toxin concentrations which may not be detected by a bioassay are expected (e.g. in
drinking water).
• New toxic cyanobacterial metabolites are to be identified.
Another cell-based assay proposed in the past has used blood cells, with agglutination
of the cells being reported as an indicator of microcystin level (Carmichael and Bent,
1981). Although this bioassay did appear promising, it has since been found to be a poor
indicator for microcystins.
Two in vitro cell bioassays have been found to be successful in detecting saxitoxins and,
like the immunoassay, they were developed primarily for monitoring toxins in shellfish.
First, a neuroreceptor binding assay was developed that uses radiolabelled saxitoxin
and works on the basis of competitive displacement (Davio and Fontelo, 1984). The
initial protocol has subsequently been refined (Doucette et al., 1994) and the data
obtained correlate well with the mouse bioassay (Cembella et al., 1995). A
neuroblastoma cell line technique for sodium channel blocking activity has also been
developed (Gallacher and Birkbeck, 1992; Jellett et al., 1992). This assay, which is
currently undergoing evaluation for its suitability as a replacement for the mouse in
shellfish monitoring, is now available as a commercial test kit.
13.4 Analytical methods for cyanotoxins
Analytical methods use the physicochemical properties of cyanotoxins such as
molecular weight, chromophores and reactivities due to the functional groups in the
molecules. Physicochemical methods used for cyanotoxin detection are summarised in
Table 13.2, which also indicates that the initial capital expenditure to establish most of
these methods is high. Appropriate use of such methods is discussed in Box 13.4.
Table 13.2 Physicochemical methods for the detection of cyanotoxins
Cost2
Method1 Comments Reference(s)
Cap. Con. Pers.
Microcystins and nodularins
HPLC- H M L UV spectra can give tentative id Lawton et al.,
PDA 1994b
LC/MS VH M M/L A number of different interfaces; mass Kondo et al.,
confirmation; can have PDA 1992;
Edwards et al.,
1992
TLC L L M Qualitative; requires standards and further Harada, 1996
confirmation of toxins
MMPB H/VH M M Detection by GC-MS or LC-MS detects total Sano et al., 1992;
microcystin/nodularin Harada et al.,
1996
MALDI VH L M/L Initially poor but recent developments have Erhardt et al,
improved accuracy 1997
CE-MS H L M Requires further development but has future
promise
NMR VH M M/H Can characterise cyanotoxins; needs mg Botes et al., 1984;
quantities and expert interpretation Harada, 1996
Anatoxin-a and homoanatoxin-a
HPLC- H M L Characteristic UV spectra Edwards et al.,
PDA 1992
GC-MS H M L Characteristic ion spectra Smith et al., 1987
GC-ECD H M L Requires sample cleanup Stevens et al.,
1988
LC/MS VH M M/L Sensitive and specific Harada et al.,
1993
Anatoxin-a(S)
HPLC H M L Very poor chromophore, not suitable for routine Matsunaga et al.,
detection 1989
Cylindrospermopsin
HPLC- H M L Lack of available standards; give characteristic Harada et al.,
PDA UV spectra 1994;
Hawkins et al.,
1997
Saxitoxins
HPLC- H M H Precolumn derivatisation; poor stability of Lawrence et al.,
pre derivative 1995
HPLC- H M M Three solvent systems required to analyse for Oshima et al.,
post all variants 1995
LC/MS VH M M/L Best method for all variants but equipment cost Quilliam et al.,
can be prohibitive 1989;
Hines et al., 1993
CE-MS H L M Poor detection limits; needs further Pleasance et al.,
development 1992;
Lock et al., 1994
1 See text for an explanation of the different methods listed
2 Cap. Capital; Con. Consumables; Pers. Personnel; L Low; M Medium; H High; VH Very
high
Another approach for further confirmation and identification of microcystins has been
proposed using a LC-linked protein phosphatase assay (Boland et al., 1993; Chen et al.,
1993). Essentially, this method makes use of HPLC to separate and identify tentatively
the cyanotoxins present, and then monitors the bioactivity of the detected peaks using
the protein phosphatase inhibition assay. This provides excellent confirmation of protein
phosphatase inhibiting cyanotoxins, especially in complex samples.
13.4.1 Detection methods for microcystins and nodularins
The majority of analytical methods have been developed primarily for microcystins
although because both nodularins and microcystins show similar physicochemical
properties, nodularins can easily be analysed by the same methods. The most
commonly-used analytical system for this class of cyanotoxins is HPLC (see Box 13.5).
Combined with UV detection, HPLC has been used extensively for the detection of
microcystins, but because this method relies on retention time for identification,
microcystin standards are required (Harada, 1996). Detection by UV can be made more
specific by using a photodiode array (PDA) UV detector (Lawton et al., 1994a) but it has
very limited ability to identify individual microcystins because almost all microcystins
show a similar UV spectrum. Recent advances in detector hardware can now provide
high resolution spectra that detect very slight variations in chemical composition and can
be used in conjunction with advanced spectral matching software. These developments
may assist in the identification of microcystins by spectral match data in conjunction with
retention times. However, a fundamental problem still exists in the availability of
standards. With over 60 microcystins known, it is currently impossible to create a
definitive spectral library, which is a limiting factor when using this method to identify
unknown microcystins.
Typical HPLC analysis uses a reverse-phase C18 silica column with separation
achieved over a gradient of water and acetonitrile, both containing 0.05 per cent
triflouroacetic acid (TFA). The gradient has to cover a sufficient range of polarities (e.g.
30-70 per cent acetonitrile) to allow the analysis of all microcystins which are known to
vary considerably in their polarities. Data is gathered at 238 nm and where PDA is used
spectral information is collected between 200 and 300 nm. Use of HPLC-PDA can allow
tentative identification of microcystins and this method was found to perform very well
when over 20 samples were assessed by HPLC and compared with mouse bioassay
data. No false negatives were observed and only one false positive was reported, the
latter being attributed to a relatively low level of microcystin which failed to cause death
in the mouse bioassay (Lawton et al., 1994b). Other solvent systems have also been
successfully used including methanol/water and ammonium acetate/acetonitrile.
Box 13.5 Possibilities and limitations of HPLC with UV spectra for microcystin analysis
High pressure liquid chromatography can be used routinely to identify and quantify microcystins,
but not to differentiate between structural variants of most microcystins. For example, in a sample
from Radeburg Reservoir (1 July 1996, monospecific population of Microcystis spp.), UV-spectra
indicated nine microcystins, three of which could be identified with commercially available
standards by their retention times to be microcystin-RR (peak 1), microcystin-YR (peak 3), and
microcystin LR (peak 6). However, six other minor microcystins could not be further specified by
this method alone. For a tentative assessment of the toxicity of this sample, a "worst case"
approach was chosen by calculating the sum of all of the nine microcystins and assuming them to
be as toxic as -LR and -YR, the most toxic variants currently known.
For preliminary microcystin screening and for routine monitoring, HPLC with photodiode array
detection is an excellent approach because it efficiently provides an overview of toxin content,
and a worst-case toxicity estimate can be derived. Therefore, if a local or regional authority must
deal regularly with microcystin monitoring, establishment of HPLC techniques with photodiode
array detection of UV spectra is recommended. Further identification of microcystins can then be
performed with selected samples. In many cases, it will be advisable to subcontract this to
laboratories with specialised expertise.
Results of HPLC analysis of a sample from Radeburg Reservoir (1 July 1996, monospecific
population of Microcystis spp.) showing nine microcystins identified by their characteristic UV-
spectra (Fastner, unpublished data)
Analysis of microcystins and nodularins by HPLC-PDA
Apparatus
• Gradient HPLC system with photodiode array detection
• Data acquisition system
• Auto-sampler, recommended for high sample throughput
• C18 column e.g. 4.6 × 250 mm Symmetry (Waters)
• Column oven, 40 °C
• Pipette, 0.1-0.5 ml
Laboratory conditions
Effective ventilation, taking into account that acetonitrile is heavier than air and
accumulates at ground level.
Reagents
• Eluent A, water plus TFA, 0.5 ml TFA added to 1,000 ml water
• Eluent B, acetonitrile plus TFA, 0.5 ml TFA added to 1,000 ml water
• Helium gas
• Methanol
Note: all reagents must be high purity, HPLC grade.
Procedure
1. Prepare solvents and degas in a stream of helium gas
2. Program a linear gradient (1 ml min-1) as follows:
Time (mins) 0 10 40 42 44 46 55
Eluent A% 70 65 30 0 0 70 70
Eluent B% 30 35 70 100 100 30 30
3. Equilibrate the column at the desired temperature and gradient starting conditions.
4. Set photodiode array detector to monitor between 200 and 300 nm.
5. Running a blank sample first, i.e. injecting only methanol, helps the system settle and
ensures reproducible retention times.
6. Samples and standards are usually prepared in methanol. However, some
microcystins are less soluble in methanol (e.g. microcystin-YR). Check product
information where available. Samples should be centrifuged or filtered to remove
particulates before carrying out HPLC analysis.
7. It is advisable always to run a standard at the beginning and end of a set of analyses,
because this helps to confirm correct operation of the system and indicates the degree
of retention time drift.
8. A calibration curve should be performed when establishing the method and at regular
intervals, especially after changing a column or lamp.
9. Chromatograms are best viewed, and integration carried out, at 238 nm because this
is the absorption maximum of most microcystins and nodularins.
10. Microcystin congeners can be identified where they have the same retention time
and spectrum as a standard, but for many microcystins no standards exist. These can
be identified as microcystins, but the respective congener may only be tentatively
inferred from published retention times in relation to identified congeners. However,
advances in spectral matching software provide increased confidence in microcystin
identification by providing a numeric indication of how similar an unknown is to a range
of microcystins in a spectral library.
When further confirmation and identification of microcystins is required, more advanced
methodology must be used. Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) is a
very promising method because it enables the simultaneous separation and
identification of microcystins in a mixture (Kondo et al., 1992; Edwards et al., 1993; Poon
et al., 1993). Figure 13.6 shows the Frit-FAB (fast atom bombardment) LC/MS analysis
data of a toxin from a bloom sample collected in Japan. The toxic fraction contains
mainly two microcystins as shown by the mass chromatogram monitored at the
characteristic ion m/z 135 derived from Adda, which has proved to be useful for the
discrimination of microcystins from other types of compounds (Kondo et al., 1992). The
two peaks were readily identified as microcystins-RR and -LR according to the mass
spectra and mass chromatograms at their [M+H]+. An advanced Frit-FAB LC/MS method
using a microbore column (0.3 mm internal diameter) enabled the identification of
nanogram levels of microcystins in water and biological samples (Kondo et al., 1995,
1996). This increase in sensitivity was achieved by splitting the mobile phase between
the pump and the injector so that the total effluent could be introduced into the mass
spectrometer.
A physicochemical screening method that is based on the detection of 2-methyl-3-
methoxy-4-phenylbutyric acid (MMPB) as an oxidation product of microcystins has been
reported. The MMPB was initially prepared by Lemieux oxidation, followed by analysis
by gas chromatography (GC) with a flame ionisation detector or HPLC with fluorescence
detection (Sano et al., 1992). However, it required tedious procedures such as extraction,
cleanup, oxidation and post-treatment in order to eliminate the reagents used, and
derivatisation for GC and HPLC analysis. An improved method using ozonolysis made it
possible to reduce significantly the formation times of MMPB because the previously
required extraction, cleanup and other procedures could be entirely eliminated (Harada
et al., 1996). The resulting intact MMPB was directly analysed by thermospray (TSP)
interface LC/MS and EI-GC/MS using selected ion monitoring. This new procedure, from
the ozonolysis of the microcystins to analysis of MMPB at picomol levels, took only 30
minutes to perform. The quantification of bloom samples achieved by this method were
consistent with those obtained by HPLC analysis, showing that the method provided a
means of screening for microcystins, as well as for their accurate quantification.
Additionally, the most remarkable feature of this method is the applicability to complex
sample matrixes, including solid material such as animal tissue, without the requirement
for any complicated processing.
The structural determination of microcystins and nodularins has been carried out by
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and recent advances in 2D NMR
techniques have proved to be essential for the structural determination of known and
unknown microcystins. Fast atom bombardment MS and liquid secondary ion (LSI) MS
give a protonated molecule [M+H]+, providing information about molecular weight with
further structural information obtained by Tandem FAB MS (FAB-MS/MS) as used in
recent studies (Namikoshi et al., 1995). However, NMR and MS (except LC/MS) usually
require relatively large amounts of sample (milligram quantities) and completely purified
microcystins, therefore they are not used in routine monitoring (Botes et al., 1984;
Namikoshi et al., 1995; Harada, 1996).
Figure 13.6 Frit-FAB LC/MS analysis of a toxic fraction from a bloom sample
collected in Japan (Data supplied by Ken-ichi Harada and Fumio Kondo)
Microcystin-RR (MW 1037)
Microcystin-LR (MW 994)
For identification of microcystins with very small sample volumes (less than 1 mm3
freeze-dried material). Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionisation Time of Flight
(MALDI-TOF) has recently been developed (Erhardt et al., 1997). This method provides
the molecular mass of all of the peptides in a sample and thus gives strong indications of
the microcystin variants present. Post Source Decay (PDS) spectra may be obtained,
which are characteristic for different microcystins. A library is currently being established.
For rapid qualitative assessment of microcystins and other cyanobacterial peptides, this
method is highly promising. Quantitative assessment is not yet possible.
Different methods provide different and often complementary information, therefore
combined use of suitable methods is recommended according to the purpose and type
of data required. This is necessary because none of the methods currently available
provides all the information which may be required. Furthermore, individual laboratories
must identify the techniques that are both suitable for their analytical requirements and
use their own expertise and available technology (see Meriluoto (1997) for a recent
review of chromatographic methods for microcystins). Initial screening of samples can
check rapidly for the presence of microcystins in a small amount of sample using
sensitive and simple methods. Figure 13.1 summarised the relationship between
sensitivity and selectivity of analytical methods for microcystins, showing that different
methods provide different and complementary information.
For studies requiring enhanced precision, accuracy and sensitivity in detection of
individual toxins, a multistage procedure is required. This may comprise initial screening
of samples to check for the presence of microcystins in a small amount of sample using
sensitive and simple methods, such as bioassays (e.g. ELISA, protein phosphatase
inhibition assay) and MMPB method. The use of screening helps to reduce the number
of samples which require full analytical investigation and thus reduces the laboratory
commitment. Furthermore, rapid results from an initial screen may aid prompt regulatory
responses regarding the suitability of water for human use. If a sample is positive in a
screening test, it will be necessary to follow through with identification and quantitative
analysis. Prior to this, cleanup and sample concentration is often very important for
many samples because relatively low levels of microcystins, around 1-2 µg l-1, are
usually present in water samples. A tandem cleanup system using ODS silica gel and
silica gel cartridges, facilitates the accurate analysis of trace amounts of microcystins in
water. Finally, quantitation of microcystins is usually essential, and although the
screening methods can provide an indication of total microcystin concentrations in
samples, a separation and spectroscopic method such as HPLC with UV detection
should be applied at this final step. Availability of authentic standards would strengthen
the capability of HPLC with UV detection (preferably with photodiode array detection) but
otherwise LC/MS should be the method of choice despite the requirement of a more
specialised technique.
13.4.2 Anatoxin-a
Three methods for analysis of anatoxin-a have been reported to date: GC/MS, GC with
electron capture detection (ECD) and HPLC. One GC/MS method has been published
as a confirmation of anatoxin-a in material taken from a toxic bloom that resulted in the
deaths of 16 cows (Smith and Lewis, 1987). In the procedure, following liquid-liquid
extraction with N-acetylation, the resulting acetylated toxin was analysed by a capillary
GC/MS. Although confirmation was based on interpretation of the mass spectrum, the
detection limit was unclear. Another GC/MS method has also been established for N-
acetylated anatoxin-a (Himberg, 1989) and it was successfully employed for preliminary
characterisation of neurotoxic cyanobacteria from Finland (Sivonen et al., 1989). The
GC/ECD method provided a higher sensitivity than other analytical methods, it used an
internal standard for accurate quantification, and it could be applied to analysis of field
samples (Stevens and Krieger, 1988). Although GC/ECD requires a considerably more
complicated cleanup operation and derivatisation prior to analysis, it has been used
successfully for stability studies on anatoxin-a (Stevens and Krieger, 1991).
Derivatisation with N-pentafluorobenzylbromide was shown to achieve a sensitivity of 2.5
pg (Bumke-Vogt et al., 1996). It is possible to use HPLC with UV detection to analyse
intact anatoxin-a which has a strong absorption at 227 nm. After extraction of a
cyanobacterial suspension with chloroform, followed by re-extraction with 0.01N
hydrochloric acid, the resulting extract is separated under the following conditions:
column, ODS silica gel; mobile phase, methanol-0.01M perchloric acid (7:3); detection,
UV (227 nm). Harada et al. (1989) reported an alternative approach using a reversed
phase HPLC method with a methanol-10.01M ammonium chloride (1:9) solvent system.
Mass spectrometry is a very effective method for identification of anatoxin-a and its
derivatives. Conventional electron ionisation (El) and chemical ionisation (CI) can yield
molecular ions and protonated molecules, respectively. Ross et al. (1989) evaluated
secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), GC/MS, desorption CI and TSP-MS for
detection of the toxin and its derivatives. The use of HPLC coupled with mass
spectrometry using thermospray interface (TSP-LC/MS) has also been investigated
(Harada et al., 1993). The latter method made possible a sensitive, specific and
reproducible analysis of anatoxin-a and its non-toxic oxidation product when used in
combination with a cleanup method including a solid phase extraction with a reversed
phase carboxylic acid cartridge. Using this method, trace amounts of anatoxin-a were
detected in three strains and two bloom samples collected in Japan.
13.4.3 Anatoxin-a(S)
Matsunaga et al. (1989) purified anatoxin-a(s) and determined its structure, although no
analytical method has been developed. Traditional HPLC plus UV detection is not
suitable because this cyanotoxin lacks a strong chromophore. Liquid
chromatography/mass spectrometry may prove useful, but this analytical technique has
not been evaluated yet for anatoxin-a(S).
13.4.4 Cylindrospermopsin
The first analytical method reported for this toxin consisted of a combination of a cleanup
step using HP-20 and ODS silica gel cartridges followed by HPLC with photodiode array
detection. This method was applied to a bloom sample collected in Japan which was
thought to contain Cylindrospermopsin (Harada et al., 1994). However, the authors
suggested that the mobile phase used in this study was not satisfactory because
Cylindrospermopsin showed poor retention power on the ODS column and slight tailing,
and their method requires further development to allow precise analysis.
A recently published method (Hawkins et al., 1997) describes the extraction of cells in 5
per cent aqueous acetic acid and analysis using Spherisorb ODS-2 with a 10 minute
linear gradient from 0 to 5 per cent methanol followed by a further 10 minutes at 5 per
cent methanol. This gave good retention, separation and peak shape.
Cylindrospermopsin was found to have a characteristic UV absorbance spectrum
between 200 and 300 nm, with a maximum absorbance at 262 nm.
13.4.5 Saxitoxins
The methods mentioned here have been developed primarily for the analysis of
saxitoxins in the marine environment, particularly in shellfish. However, they have been
found to be equally suitable for cyanobacterial samples. The most commonly used
analytical method for the saxitoxins is HPLC with on-line post-column oxidation and
fluorescence detection (Oshima et al., 1995). Although this method has been found to be
the most satisfactory to-date, it requires three different mobile phase systems to allow
analysis of all the saxitoxins. Furthermore, there is limited availability of analytical
standards for all saxitoxin variants, which are necessary for peak confirmation. Mass
spectrometry with FAB (Mirocha et al., 1992), TSP (Wils and Hulst, 1993), electrospray
(Hines et al., 1993) and ion-spray ionisation (Quilliam et al., 1989) has been reported for
the paralytic shellfish poison (PSP) toxins. The application of an LC/MS method for
saxitoxins has been reported, although it appears that it will be difficult to achieve
analysis of all PSP toxins within one LC/MS run. The combination of capillary
electrophoresis (CE) with ion-spray ionisation has proved to be successful for the
saxitoxins (Pleasance et al., 1992; Locke and Thibault, 1994). Analysis using CE was
found to give poor detection limits due to the very small injection volumes (< 10 nl), but it
may be possible to overcome this problem with an on-column sample preconcentration
system. Furthermore, developments in CE technology are anticipated in the near future
which will increase flow cell volume, hence enhancing detection limits.
13.5 References
An, J. and Carmichael, W.W. 1994 Use of a colorimetric protein phosphatase inhibition
assay and enzyme linked immuno sorbent assay for the study of microcystins and
nodularins. Toxicon, 32, 1495-1507.
Andersen, R.J., Luu, H.A., Chen, D.Z.X., Holmes, C.F.B., Kent, M., LeBlanc, M., Taylor,
F.J.R. and Williams, D.E. 1993 Chemical and biological evidence links microcystins to
salmon 'Netpen Liver Disease'. Toxicon, 31, 1315-1323.
Aune, T. and Berg, K. 1986 Use of freshly prepared rat hepatocytes to study toxicity of
blooms of blue-green algae Microcystis aeruginosa and Oscillatoria agardhii. J. Toxic.
Environ. Health, 19, 325-336.
Baird, D.J., Soares, A.M.V.M., Girling, A.E., Barber, I., Bradley, M.C. and Calow, P. 1989
The long-term maintenance of Daphnia magna for use in ecotoxicity tests: Problems and
prospects. In: H. Lokke, H. Tyle and F. Bro-Rasmussen [Eds] Proceedings of the First
Conference on Ecotoxicology, Lyngby, Denmark, 144-148.
Boland, M.P., Smillie, M.A., Chen, D.Z.X. and Holmes, C.F.B. 1993 A unified bioscreen
for the detection of diarrhetic shellfish toxins and microcystins in marine and freshwater
environments. Toxicon, 31, 1393-1405.
Botes, D.P., Tuinman, A.A., Wessels, P.L., Viljoen, C.C., Kruger, H., Williams, D.H. and
Santikarn, S. 1984. The structure of cyanoginosin-LA, a cyclic heptapeptide toxin from
the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa. J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Transactions, 1,
2311-2318.
Bumke-Vogt, C., Mailahn, W., Rotard, W. and Chorus, I. 1996: A highly sensitive
analytical method for the neurotoxin anatoxin-a using GC-ECD, and first application to
laboratory cultures. Phycologia, 35 (6, Supplement), 51-56.
Campbell, D.L., Lawton, L.A., Beattie, K.A. and Codd, G.A. 1994 Comparative
assessment of the specificity of the brine shrimp and Microtox assay to hepatotoxic
(microcystin-LR-containing) cyanobacteria. Environ. Toxicol. Water Qual., 9, 71-77.
Carmichael, W.W. and Bent, P.E. 1981 Hemagglutination method for detection of
freshwater cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) toxins. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 41(6),
1383-1388.
Cembella, A.D., Milenkovic, L., Doucette, G. and Fernandez, M. 1995 In Vitro
biochemical methods and mammalian bioassays for phycotoxins. In: G.M. Hallegraeff,
D.M. Anderson and A.D. Cembella [Eds] Manual on Harmful Marine Microalgae, IOC
Manuals and Guides No. 33, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, Paris, 177-211.
Chen, D.Z.X., Boland, M.P., Smillie, M.A., Klix, H., Ptak, C., Andersen, R.J. and Holmes,
C.F.B. 1993 Identification of protein phosphatase inhibitors of the microcystin class in
the marine environment. Toxicon, 31, 1407-1414.
Chu, F.S., Huang, X. and Wei, R.D. 1990 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for
microcystins in blue-green algal blooms. J. Assoc. Analyt. Chem., 73(3), 451-456.
Chu, F.S., Huang, X., Wei, R.D. and Carmichael, W.W. 1989 Production and
characterisation of antibodies against microcystins. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 55, 1928-
1933.
Codd, G.A., Brooks, W.P., Priestley, I.M., Poon, G.K. and Bell, S.G. 1989 Production,
detection and quantification of cyanobacterial toxins. Tox. Assess., 4, 499-511.
Craig, M., McCready, T.L., Luu, H.A., Smillie, M.A., Dubord, P. and Holmes, C.F.B. 1993
Identification and characterisation of hydrophobic microcystins in Canadian freshwater
cyanobacteria. Toxicon, 31, 1541-1549.
Davio, S.R. and Fontelo, P.A. 1984 A competitive displacement assay to detect saxitoxin
and tetrodotoxin. Analyt. Biochem., 141, 199-204.
Dierstein, R., Kaiser, I. and Weckesser, J. 1989 Inhibition of prodigiosin formation in
Serratia marcescens by extracts of toxic cyanobacteria. System. Appl. Microbiol., 12,
244-248.
Doucette, G.J., Logan, M.M., Van Dolah, F.M. and Ramsdell, J.S. 1994 A sensitive,
microtiter plate-based receptor assay for paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP) toxins. In:
J.R. Forbes [Ed.] Proceedings of the Fourth Canadian Workshop on Harmful Marine
Algae, Can. Tech. Rep. Fish. Aquatic Sci., 2016, 9.
Edwards, C., Beattie, K.A., Scrimgeour, C.M. and Codd, G.A. 1992 Identification of
anatoxin-a in benthic cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) and in associated dog poisonings
at Loch Insh, Scotland. Toxicon, 30(10), 1165-1175.
Edwards, C., Lawton, L.A., Beattie, K.A., Codd, G.A., Pleasance, S. and Dear, G.J. 1993
Analysis of microcystins from cyanobacteria by liquid chromatography with mass
spectrometry using atmospheric-pressure ionization. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom.,
7, 714-721.
Erhardt, M., von Döhren, H., Jungblut, P. 1997 Rapid typing and elucidation of new
secondary metabolites of intact cyanobacteria using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry.
Nature Biotech., 15, 906-909.
Falconer, I.R. 1993 Measurement of toxins from blue-green algae in water and
foodstuffs. In: I.R. Falconer [Ed.] Algal Toxins in Seafood and Drinking Water. Academic
Press, London, 165-175.
Fastner, J., Flieger, I. and Neumann, U. 1998 Optimised extraction of microcystins from
field samples - a comparison of different solvents and procedures. Wat. Res., 32, 3177-
3181.
Fernandez, M.L. and Cembella, A.D. 1995 Mammalian bioassays. In: G.M. Hallegraeff,
D.M. Anderson and A.D. Cembella [Eds] Manual on Harmful Marine Microalgae, IOC
Manuals and Guides No. 33, 213-228.
Gallacher, S. and Birkbeck, T.H. 1992 A tissue culture assay for direct detection of
sodium channel blocking toxins in bacterial culture supernates. FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 92,
101-108.
Harada, K.-I. 1996 Chemistry and detection of microcystins. In: M.F. Watanabe, K.-I.
Harada, W.W. Carmichael and H. Fujiki [Eds] Toxic Microcystis, Chemical Rubber
Company (CRC) Press, Boca Raton, Florida, 103-148.
Harada, K.-I., Kimura, Y., Ogawa, K., Suzuki, M., Dahlem, A.M., Beasley, V.R. and
Carmichael, W.W. 1989 A new procedure for the analysis and purification of naturally
occurring anatoxin-a from the blue-green algae Anabaena flos-aquae. Toxicon, 27(12),
1289-1296.
Harada, K.-I, Murata, H., Qiang, Z., Suzuki, M. and Kondo, F. 1996 Mass spectrometric
screening method for microcystins in cyanobacteria. Toxicon, 34, 701-710.
Harada, K.-I., Nagai, H., Kimura, Y., Suzuki, M., Park, H., Watanabe, M.F., Luukkainen,
R., Sivonen, K. and Carmichael, W.W. 1993 Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometric
detection of anatoxin-a, a neurotoxin from cyanobacteria. Tetrahedron, 49, 9251-9260.
Harada, H.-I., Ohtani, I., Iwamoto, K., Suzuki, M., Watanabe, M.F., Watanabe, M. and
Terao, K. 1994 Isolation of cylindrospermopsin from a cyanobacterium Umezakia natans
and its screening methods. Toxicon, 32(1), 73-84.
Harwig, J. and Scott, P.M. 1971 Brine shrimp (Artemia salina L.) larvae as a screening
system for fungal toxins. Appl. Microbiol., 21(6), 1011-1016.
Hawkins, P.R., Chandrasena, N.R., Jones, G.J., Humpage, A.R. and Falconer, I.R. 1997
Isolation and toxicity of Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii from an ornamental lake. Toxicon,
35, 341-346.
Heinze, R. 1996 A biotest for hepatotoxins using primary rat hepatocytes. Phycologia, 35
(Supplement), 89-93.
Himberg, K. 1989 Determination of anatoxin-a, the neurotoxin of Anabaena flos-aquae
cyanobacerium, in algae and water by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. J.
Chromatog., 481, 358-362.
Hines, H.B. 1993 Electrospray ionization of selected low-molecular-weight natural
biotoxins Biol. Mass Specrom., 22, 243-246.
Holmes, C.F.B. 1991 Liquid chromatography-linked protein phospatase bioassay; a
highly sensitive marine bioscreen for okadaic acid and related diarrhetic shellfish toxins.
Toxicon, 29(4/5), 469-477.
Isobe, M., Sugiyama, Y., Ito, T., Ohtani, I.I., Toya, Y., Nishigohri, Y. and Takai, A. 1995
New analysis method for protein phosphatase type 2A inhibitors using the firefly
bioluminescence system. Biosci., Biotechnol. Biochem., 59, 2235-2238.
Jellet, J.F., Marks, L.J., Stewart, J.E., Dorey, M.L., Watson-Wright, W. and Lawrence,
J.F. 1992 Paralytic shellfish poison (saxitoxin family) bioassays: automated endpoint
determination and standardisation of the in vitro tissue culture bioassay, and comparison
with the standard mouse bioassay. Toxicon, 30, 1143-1156.
Kfir, R., Johannsen, E. and Botes, D.P. 1986 Monoclonal antibodies specific for
cyanoginosin-LA: Preparation and characterisation. Toxicon, 24, 543-552.
Kiviranta, J., Abdel-Hameed, A., Sivonen, K., Niemela, S.I. and Carlberg, G. 1993
Toxicity of cyanobacteria to mosquito larvae: screening of active compounds. Environ.
Toxicol. Water Qual., 8, 63-71.
Kiviranta, J., Sivonen, K. and Niemelä, S.I. 1991 Detection and toxicity of cyanobacteria
by Artemia salina bioassay. Environ. Toxicol. Water Qual., 6, 423-426.
Komárek, J. and Anagnostidis, K. 1986 Modern approach to the classification system of
cyanophytes. Archiv Hydrobiol., Suppl. 73, Algological Studies, 43, 157-164.
Kondo, F., Ikai, Y., Oka, H., Ishikawa, N., Watanabe, M.F., Watanabe, M., Harada, K.-I.
and Suzuki, M. 1992 Separation and identification of microcystins in cyanobacteria by
frit-fast atom bombardment liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry. Toxicon, 30(3),
227-237.
Kondo, F., Ikai, Y., Oka, H., Matsumoto, H., Yamada, S., Ishikawa, N., Tsuji, K., Harada,
K.-I., Shimada, T., Oshikata, M. and Suzuki, M. 1995 Reliable and sensitive method for
determination of microcystins in complicated matrices by frit-fast atom bombardment
liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry. Natural Toxins, 3, 41-49.
Kondo, F., Matsumoto, H., Yamada, S., Ishikawa, N., Ito, E., Nagata, S., Ueno, Y.,
Suzuki, M. and Harada, K.-I. 1996 Detection and identification of metabolites of
Microcystins formed in vivo in mouse and rat livers. Chem. Res. Toxicol.. 9(8), 1355-
1359.
Kozma, A. 1997 Interlaboratory trial using Thamnotox kit for detecting cyanobacterial
toxins. Abstract, VIII International Conference on Harmful Algae, Vigo, Spain, 114.
Kralovec, J.A., Laycock, M.V., Richards, R. and Usleber, E. 1996 Immobilisation of small
molecules on solid matrices: A novel approach to enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
screening for saxitoxins and evaluation of anti-saxitoxin antibodies. Toxicon, 34(10),
1127-1140.
Lambert, T.W., Boland, M.P., Holmes, C.F.B. and Hrudey, S.E. 1994 Quantitation of the
microcystin hepatotoxins in water at environmentally relevant concentrations with the
protein phosphatase bioassay. Environ. Sci. Technol., 28(4), 753-755.
Lawrence, J.F., Menard, C. and Cleroux, C. 1995 Evaluation of prechromatographic
oxidation for liquid chromatographic determination of paralytic shellfish poisons in
shellfish. J. AOAC Int., 78, 514-520.
Lawton, L.A., Beattie, K.A., Hawser, S.P., Campbell, D.L. and Codd, G.A. 1994b
Evaluation of assay methods for the determination of cyanobacterial hepatotoxicity. In:
G.A. Codd, T.M. Jefferies, C.W. Keevil and E. Potter [Eds] Detection Methods for
Cyanobacterial Toxins, Special Publication No. 149, The Royal Society of Chemistry,
Cambridge, 111-116.
Lawton, L.A., Campbell, D.L., Beattie, K.A. and Codd, G.A. 1990 Use of a rapid
bioluminescence assay for detecting cyanobacterial microcystin toxicity. Lett. Appl.
Microbiol., 11, 205-207.
Lawton, L.A., Edwards, C. and Codd, G.A. 1994a Extraction and high-performance liquid
chromatographic method for the determination of microcystins in raw and treated waters.
Analyst, 119, 1525-1530.
Locke, S.J. and Thibault, P. 1994 Improvement in detection limits for the determination
of paralytic shellfish poisoning toxins in shellfish tissues using capillary
electophoresis/electrospray mass spectrometry and discontinuous buffer systems.
Analyt. Chem., 66, 3436-3446.
Lund, J.W.G., Kipling, C. and LeCren, E.D. 1958 The inverted microscope method of
estimating algal numbers and the statistical basis of enumeration by counting.
Hydrobiologia, 11, 143-170.
Mahmood, N.A. and Carmichael, W.W. 1987 Anatoxin-a(s), an anticholinesterase from
the cyanobacterium Anabaena flos-aquae NRC-525-17. Toxicon, 25(11), 1221-1227.
Matsunaga, S., Moore, R.E. and Niemszura, W.P. 1989 Anatoxin-a(S), a potent
anticholinesterase from Anabeana flos-aquae. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 111, 8021-8023.
McElhiney, J., Lawton, L.A., Edwards, C. and Gallacher, S. 1998 Development of a
bioassay employing the desert locust (Schistocerca gregaria) for the detection of
saxitoxin and related compounds in cyanobacteria and shellfish. Toxicon, 36, 417-420.
Meriluoto, J. 1997 Chromatography of microcystins. Analyt. Chim. Acta, 352, 277-298.
Mirocha, C.J., Cheong, W., Mirza, U. and Kim, Y.B. 1992 Analysis of saxitoxin in urine
by continuous-flow fast atom bombardment mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun. Mass
Spectrom., 6, 128-134.
Nagata, S., Soutome, H., Tsutsumi, T., Hasegawa, A., Sekijima, M., Sugamata, M.,
Harada, K.-I, Suganuma, M. and Ueno, Y. 1995 Novel monoclonal antibodies against
microcystin and their protective activity for hepatotoxicity. Natural Toxins, 3, 78-86.
Namikoshi, M., Sun, F., Choi, B.W., Rinehart, K.L., Carmichael, W.W., Evans, W.R. and
Beasley, V.R. 1995 Seven more microcystins from Homer Lake cells: application of the
general method for structure assignment of peptides containing, -dehydroamino acid
unit(s) J. Org. Chem., 60, 3671-3679.
Oshima, Y. 1995 Post-column derivatization HPLC methods for paralytic shellfish
poisons. In: G.M. Hallegraeff, D.M. Anderson and A.D. Cembella [Eds] Manual on
Harmful Marine Microalgae, IOC Manuals and Guides No. 33, 81-94.
Pleasance, S., Thibault, P. and Kelly, J. 1992 Comparison of liquid-junction and coaxial
interfaces for capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry with application to compounds
of concern to the aquaculture industry. J. Chromatog., 591, 325-339.
Poon, G.K., Griggs, L.J., Edwards, C., Beattie, K.A. and Codd, G.A. 1993 Liquid
chromatography-electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry of cyanobacterial toxins. J.
Chromatog., 628, 215-233.
Quilliam, M.A, Thomson, B.A., Scott, G.J. and Siu, K.W.M. 1989 Ion-spray mass
spectrometry of marine neurotoxins. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 3, 145.
Ross, M.M., Kidwell, D.A. and Callahan, J.H. 1989 Mass-spectrometric analysis of
anatoxin-a. J. Analyt. Toxicol., 13(6), 317-312.
Ross, M.R., Siger, A. and Abbott, C. 1985 The house fly: An acceptable subject for
paralytic shellfish toxin bioassay. In: D.M. Anderson, J.A.W. White and D.G. Baden [Eds]
Toxic Dinoflagellates: Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Toxic
Dinoflagellates. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 433-438.
Sano, T., Nohara, K., Shirai, F. and Kaya, K. 1992 A method for microdetection of total
microcystin content in waterbloom of cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). Int. J. Environ.
Analyt. Chem., 49, 163-170.
Sivonen, K., Himberg, K., Luukkainen, R., Niemela, S.I., Poon, G.K. and Codd, G.A.
1989 Preliminary characterization of neurotoxic cyanobacteria blooms and strains from
Finland. Tox. Assess., 4, 339-352.
Smith, R.A. and Lewis, D. 1987 A rapid analysis of water for anatoxin-a, the unstable
toxic alkaloid from Anabaena flos-aquae, the stable non-toxic alkaloids left after
bioreduction and related a amine which may be nature's precursor to anatoxin-a. Vet.
Human Toxicol., 29, 153-154.
Stevens, D.K. and Krieger, R.I. 1988 Analysis of anatoxin-a by GC/ECD. J. Analyt.
Toxicol.. 12, 126-131.