Chapter 4
Understanding the
occurrence of cyanobacteria
and cyanotoxins
Bastiaan W. Ibelings, Rainer Kurmayer,
Sandra M. F. O. Azevedo, Susanna A. Wood,
Ingrid Chorus, and Martin Welker
CONTENTS
Introduction 214
4.1 What makes many planktonic cyanobacteria dominant? 214
4.1.1 Nutrient storage and nitrogen fixation 214
4.1.2 Buoyancy, vertical migration, surface scums and
metalimnetic layers 215
4.1.3 Light harvesting 222
4.1.4 Carbon concentrating mechanisms 222
4.1.5 Resistance to grazing and other losses 222
4.1.6 Overwintering strategies 224
4.2 Where do which cyanobacteria occur? 226
4.2.1 Planktonic cyanobacteria 226
4.2.2 Benthic and tychoplanktonic cyanobacteria 232
4.3 Which environmental factors favour cyanobacterial dominance? 234
4.3.1 The concept of “trophic state” 235
4.3.2 Nutrients 239
4.3.3 Light availability 245
4.3.4 Temperature, thermal stratification and mixing 246
4.3.5 Hydrodynamics and waterbody morphometry 248
4.3.6 pH: acidity and alkalinity 249
4.4 Can cyanobacterial blooms be predicted by models? 250
4.4.1 Models to predict surface blooms and scums 256
4.5 Will climate change affect cyanobacterial blooms? 258
4.6 Which factors determine cyanotoxin concentrations? 260
4.6.1 Composition of blooms and cyanotoxin types 261
4.6.2 Toxin content in biomass 262
4.6.3 Toxin concentrations in water 267
4.6.4 Spatial heterogeneity of toxin concentrations 270
4.6.5 Estimating cyanotoxin concentration from other
limnological parameters 272
References 275
213
214 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
INTRODUCTION
Cyanobacteria are found in almost every aquatic ecosystem. Yet their pres-
ence does not automatically pose a risk to public health. Whether or not
toxins reach health-relevant concentrations depends on the taxonomic
(and genotypic or clonal) composition of the phytoplankton as well as on
the cyanobacterial biomass. Clearly, the risks of elevated biomass, loosely
named blooms, are higher under eutrophic conditions. However, certain
cyanobacteria, for example, Planktothrix rubescens, tend to decrease under
eutrophic conditions, while others like species of Microcystis may still reach
hazardous levels under much reduced nutrient concentrations if a relatively
low biomass accumulates as scums near the lake shore. Hence, to assume
a very close link between cyanobacterial proliferation and eutrophication
is too restrictive for a good understanding of toxin risks. Therefore, for the
assessment and management of cyanobacterial hazards to human health, a
basic understanding of their properties, their behaviour in natural ecosys-
tems and the environmental conditions that support their excessive growth
is important. This chapter provides a general introduction to key traits of
cyanobacteria that support their proliferation in aquatic ecosystems. It
focuses on cyanobacteria thriving suspended in the water of lakes and res-
ervoirs, that is, those with a planktonic way of life. It also gives information
on conditions potentially promoting the growth of benthic cyanobacteria,
that is, those growing on surfaces such as rocks, sediments or submersed
vegetation. How to use this information for controlling and managing cya-
nobacterial proliferation is discussed in Chapter 8.
4.1 W HAT MAKES MANY PLANKTONIC
CYANOBACTERIA DOMINANT?
To proliferate, cyanobacteria must be able to satisfy their demands for light
energy and nutrients, particularly phosphorous (P) and nitrogen (N). They
compete for these resources with other phytoplankton and with each other.
Cyanobacteria have a number of specific traits that favour their dominance
over algal phytoplankton as well as bloom formation in many lakes, rivers and
oceans. Some traits are only found in a restricted subset of cyanobacteria, such
as the capability to fix atmospheric nitrogen or the regulation of buoyancy.
4.1.1 N utrient storage and nitrogen fixation
Cyanobacteria can sustain growth during temporal and spatial shortage of
dissolved nutrients by storing them – particularly phosphorous (P) and to a
lower extent also nitrogen (N) in amounts exceeding their current demands
for cell division and growth (Li & Dittrich, 2019). They store surplus P as
polyphosphate in the cell, sometimes enough for several cell divisions even
when external supplies are depleted below the analytical detection levels.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 215
As a consequence, one cell can multiply into 8 or even 16 cells without any
further phosphorus uptake (Reynolds, 2006).
In addition, cyanobacteria can acquire nitrogen in different forms, such
as nitrate, nitrite, and ammonium or urea. While under oxidised conditions,
N occurs as nitrate and is used as such by cyanobacteria, they can rapidly
take up reduced forms of N (ammonium and urea), for example, from sew-
age inflows or released from sediments or by mussels (Gobler et al., 2016).
Furthermore, some cyanobacteria, for instance, the genera Aphanizomenon
or Dolichospermum, can utilise atmospheric N , a capacity termed “diazot-
2
rophy”. This is a distinct advantage for cyanobacteria compared to eukaryotic
microalgae at times when other sources of nitrogen are in short supply (Oliver
& Ganf, 2000). The widely occurring genera Microcystis and Planktothrix
cannot fix atmospheric nitrogen, but they can benefit from a smaller biomass
of co-occurring N-fixing taxa whose degrading cells may leak N into the sur-
rounding water (Salk et al., 2018).
Nitrogen fixation (diazotrophy) in most taxa is located in specialised
cells, the heterocytes (see Chapter 3). These cells do not perform photosyn-
thesis since the nitrogenase enzyme complex that carries out nitrogen fixa-
tion is inactivated by oxygen released through photosynthesis. Heterocytes
are generally easily recognised microscopically due to their different shape
and pronounced cell wall, but may appear similar to vegetative cells in some
species (Gallon, 2004). Cyanobacterial N fixation can cause considerable
2
N input into aquatic ecosystems and affect global geochemical cycles, as
shown, for instance, for the marine cyanobacterium Trichodesmium in the
Atlantic Ocean (Capone et al., 2005). Diazotrophy, however, requires high
amounts of energy for the heterocytes to maintain anoxic conditions inside
the cell while being in an oxygenated environment, and therefore, N fixa-
2
tion is limited in turbid water.
Cyanobacteria are able to store excess N mainly in the form of cyano-
phycin (a copolymer of aspartate and arginine; Simon, 1971; Ziegler et al.,
1998). Even species that cannot fix atmospheric N may thus have com-
2
petitive advantage against microalgae under conditions of low N concentra-
tions (Li et al., 2001a).
4.1.2 B uoyancy, vertical migration, surface
scums and metalimnetic layers
The formation of surface blooms or scums (see Box 4.1) is one of the most
prominent visual expressions of cyanobacterial development. The cyano-
bacteria best known for the formation of surface blooms are colony- or
fi lament-forming species of genera such as Dolichospermum, Cuspidothrix,
Aphanizomenon, Microcystis and Nodularia, and under specific circum-
stances also species of Planktothrix and Raphidiopsis (Cylindrospermopsis).
Surface blooms may cover an area reaching from a few square metres up to
hundreds of square kilometres, such as blooms of Nodularia spumigena that
can cover large areas of the brackish Baltic Sea (Bianchi et al., 2000).
216 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
In order to grow, cyanobacteria, being photoautotrophic organisms, need
to spend sufficient time where there is sufficient light. Many species of cya-
nobacteria can be buoyant through their gas vesicles (see Chapter 3), thus
avoiding sedimentation into deeper layers with low or no light availability.
BOX 4.1: BLOOMS, SCUMS, MASS
DEVELOPMENTS – SOME DEFINITIONS
In the literature on cyanobacteria, the use of terms describing high cell density
varies widely. This book proposes and uses the following definitions (see also
Fig. 4.1 and 4.2):
Bloom: high average phytoplankton (i.e., algae and/or cyanobacteria) cell
density in a waterbody (in this book, usually referring to blooms of cyanobac-
teria), also referred to as “mass development” or “proliferation”. Blooms can
be visually recognised by low transparency and water colour.
Surface bloom: buoyant cyanobacteria accumulating near or at the surface
forming visible streaks, sometimes discernible in remote sensing images.
Surface bloom formation may occur even where average cyanobacterial cell
density is low if vertical and horizontal concentrating mechanisms lead to
pronounced cell accumulation at the surface. Surface blooms can occur at
large scales covering tens of square kilometres in large lakes or oceans.
Scum or surface scum: massive accumulation of buoyant cyanobacteria at the
water surface forming a cohesive layer, often the result of secondary hori-
zontal concentration at the shore, which can reach up to several centimetres
thickness. In very dense scums, the surface of the scum can become nearly dry,
and this may lead to massive cell lysis, colouring the water blue through the
release of phycocyanin. Scums can also be formed by other phytoplankton, like
Euglenophytes, but these are generally only a few millimetres thick.
Under eutrophic conditions, water is turbid, rendering light gradients in
the water column quite steep and photosynthesis restricted to the upper-
most water layer of a few metres or even less than 1 m. The water layer in
which light for photosynthesis is available is termed “euphotic zone”. If
waterbody mixing is deeper than the euphotic zone, phytoplankton cells
spend only a limited part of the day in layers with sufficient light for pho-
tosynthesis, and light may then limit growth rates. During calm periods,
vertical mixing ceases and thermal (micro)stratification develops in water-
bodies (Box 4.2). Under these conditions, nonbuoyant plankton sinks out of
the euphotic zone, but buoyant cyanobacteria float up, into the near-surface
layer, where the cells spend all or most of the daytime in the light. This
is typical for colonial cyanobacteria, because due to their large size, they
develop high flotation velocities, as can be observed when a water sample is
placed in a glass cylinder (Humphries & Lyne, 1988).
4 Conditions determining occurrence 217
BOX 4.2: THERMAL STRATIFICATION
Many lakes develop temperature gradients over depth. Thermal stratification
develops when two water layers of differing average temperature are stably
separated. This happens because the specific density of water is the highest at
4 °C and decreases at higher as well as at lower temperatures. In spring, water
temperature increases at the surface, and above a certain temperature differ-
ence onwards, the warmer, less dense water in the upper part of the water
column no longer mixes with colder, denser water in deeper parts. Further
heating of the upper layer of water eventually leads to a sharp separation of
warm and cold water. The layer where the temperature difference over depth is
most pronounced is called the thermocline. For practical purposes, stratifica-
tion is defined as a temperature difference of more than one degree centigrade
over one metre of water depth. The upper, warm layer is called epilimnion,
the deeper, cooler layer the hypolimnion and the layer around the thermocline
metalimnion. The more pronounced the temperature gradient, the more sta-
ble the stratification, and more energy, for example, wind, is needed to over-
come it by deep mixing. Thus, once stable stratification is established, cooling
of surface water at night or periods of cold weather will cause some mixing of
the surface layer, but not the total circulation of the waterbody. While thermal
stratification distinctly separates these water layers, some exchange of water
between the epilimnion and the hypolimnion may yet occur (e.g., through eddy
diffusion), the extent of which depends on the stability of stratification. This in
turn is affected by the ratio of the waterbody’s surface area to its depth, wind
exposition and frequency of storms, for example.
0 0
0
5
10
0
5
10
]retem[
htpeD
ekaL
Water Temperature [°C]
10 20 30 10 20 30
epi
meta
15 hypo
20
25 spring summer
15
20
25 winter fall
218 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
At the end of the summer, the epilimnion successively becomes cooler
and once temperatures – and in consequence water densities – of the epi-
and hypolimnion have converged, complete mixing of the water column
occurs. This process is called mixis or overturn. Further cooling at the sur-
face can lead to an inverse stratification during winter, in particular when
an ice-cover is present, because water density decreases at temperatures
below 4 °C.
Stratification not only affects water temperature, but also many biological,
chemical and physical processes. Particles such as planktonic organisms (dead
or alive) and excreta of fish or zooplankton can settle and reach the hypo-
limnion and the sediment where they decay. This process consumes oxygen
and releases minerals, including phosphorus and nitrogen, from the decay-
ing material settling or already deposited on the sediment surface. As there
is little exchange between epi- and hypolimnion in a stratified waterbody,
substances such as phosphorus and nitrogen accumulate in the hypolimnion.
Therefore, thermal stratification also causes chemical and biological stratifi-
cation, frequently leading to an anoxic hypolimnion that is rich in dissolved
inorganic nutrients.
Depending on the stability of thermal stratification and frequency of mix-
ing, several types of lakes are distinguished.
In shallow polymictic waterbodies, stratification occurs irregularly but fre-
quently while lasting only for hours, days or at most for weeks, depending on
meteorological conditions such as air temperature, wind speed and direction.
Temperature gradients generally are not pronounced, and hence, stratifica-
tion is not stable, yet this type of microstratification has important effects on,
for instance, buoyant phytoplankton.
In dimictic lakes, thermal stratification is stable during summer as well as
during winter, and mixing occurs twice a year, that is, as “spring overturn”
and “autumn overturn”. Dimictic lakes generally are deep in relation to their
surface area.
In monomictic waterbodies, mixing occurs only once, generally during the
winter, in lakes and reservoirs that do not freeze. This is common for large
reservoirs in tropical and subtropical climates, but may also occur in temper-
ate regions. Monomixis can also arise from factors such as seasonal precipita-
tion patterns, for example, monsoon seasons.
Besides the frequency of water column mixing, the completeness of the
mixing process is classified. In holomictic waterbodies, mixing is from the
surface to the bottom, while in meromictic ones, a bottom layer remains
excluded and never or very infrequently gets mixed with the overlaying water
4 Conditions determining occurrence 219
layer. This occurs in lakes with a particular morphometry like deep crater
lakes that may be classified as dimictic and meromictic.
One of the ongoing and forecasted effects of climate warming is shifts
between mixing regimes, for example, from poly- or dimictic to monomictic
or, in some situations, less stable stratification if the frequency of storms
increases. Given the importance of mixing regimes for lake ecosystem func-
tioning, the consequences can be far reaching.
Buoyancy regulation – that is, a variation in the buoyancy state – depends
on the availability of resources such as carbon, nitrogen and phosphorous
(e.g., Klemer et al., 1982; Konopka et al., 1987), but most importantly,
buoyancy is regulated by light. Cyanobacteria produce more gas vesicles
under low irradiance, thus increasing their buoyancy. Under high irra-
diance, gas vesicles may be diluted by growth, or – after extended light
exposure – collapse under high turgor pressure (Kinsman et al., 1991). In
addition, cyanobacteria exposed to light produce carbohydrates, the excess
of which may be stored as glycogen that acts as ballast, so that buoyancy
can decrease to a point where cells start to sink. In darker, deeper layers,
the cells consume their glycogen storage as energy source, and thus, they
regain buoyancy. This may result in diel changes in buoyancy and vertical
migration, with populations being maximally buoyant during the night and
a percentage of the cells losing buoyancy during the day (Ibelings et al.,
1991; Rabouille & Salençon, 2005; Medrano et al., 2013).
Since the vertical migration of Microcystis can span large ampli-
tudes, Microcystis can also proliferate in deep lakes. Typically, however,
Microcystis becomes dominant in eutrophic lakes of intermediate depth,
which are sufficiently stratified to allow them to control buoyancy and
thus to position themselves vertically. In these ecosystems, Microcystis
colonies are among the best-adapted phytoplankton to overcome mixing
forces (provided these are relatively weak) – allowing the colonies to dis-
entrain from turbulence – and gain a competitive advantage by floating
upwards during periods of increased stability (Reynolds, 1994; Dokulil
& Teubner, 2000).
In waterbodies with thermal stratification, buoyancy regulation can lead to
different accumulation patterns of cyanobacterial biomass and consequently
of cyanotoxins, depending on the taxa involved (Figure 4.1, Figure 4.6):
• formation of surface blooms or scums, typical for blooms of Microcystis,
Dolichospermum and Aphanizomenon. Formation of a cohesive scum
is generally preceded by the occurrence of visible streaks at the surface.
Once congregated at the surface, the cells can be further accumulated
by wind-drift at leeward sites;
220 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
• largely homogeneous distribution of cells in the water column with
scum formation occurring only exceptionally under the conditions
of extreme water column stability. A typical example is Planktothrix
agardhii, which only rarely creates surface blooms or scums, but may
lead to pronounced greenish turbidity of homogeneously distributed fil-
aments. Further examples include Limnothrix and Pseudanabaena as
well as other taxa that have not been shown to produce known toxins;
• the accumulation of cells in a deep layer (deep chlorophyll maximum),
either between upper warm and deeper cold water (i.e., the “ther-
mocline” or “metalimnion”; see Box 4.2) or at low light intensity.
Typical examples include the red-coloured Planktothrix rubescens
in deep, stratified lakes and reservoirs. However, green-pigmented
cyanobacteria (Aphanizomenon flosaquae, Dolichospermum) have
also been reported to form metalimnetic layers that may last for sev-
eral months (Konopka, 1989). In stratified subtropical reservoirs,
Raphidiopsis (Cylindrospermopsis) raciborskii has been found in
deep layers with low light intensity (see section 4.5). Occasionally,
such cyanobacteria may leave their position in the metalimnion and
accumulate at the surface, in the case of P. rubescens, leading to
purple surface blooms. Seasonal or storm-induced mixing may also
carry them into the upper layers.
A B C D E F G
surface
epi-
n
o
in meta-
m
il-
hypo-
bottom
Figure 4.1 Distribution patterns of cyanobacteria (cyanotoxins) in the water column. A:
homogeneous distribution, B: homogeneous distribution in the epilimnion of
thermally stratified waterbodies, C: gradual concentration of buoyant cyano-
bacteria towards the surface in a stable water column, D: surface bloom of
buoyant cyanobacteria, E: accumulation in a metalimnetic layer in stratified
waterbodies, F: accumulation in bottom layers through sedimentation, G:
benthic cyanobacteria growing on hard substrate. Transitions between all
individual patterns are possible.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 221
(a)
cells/L: 107
chl-a μg/L: 2
MC μg/L: 1
risk level: low
(b)
max cells/L: 108
max chl-a μg/L: 20
max MC μg/L: 10
risk level: moderate
(c)
max cells/L: 109
max chl-a μg/L: 200
max MC μg/L: 100
risk level: high
(d)
max cells/L: 1012
max chl-a μg/L: 200000
max MC μg/L: 100000
risk level: very high
Figure 4.2 Schematic illustration of the formation of a surface bloom and scum of
buoyant planktonic cyanobacteria like Microcystis spp. The maximum toxin
concentrations under given conditions are estimated assuming average cell
quota of 100 fg microcystin (MC) per cell (see Box 4.8). (a): strong winds
lead to a mixing of the entire waterbody. (b): moderate wind speed allows
for (temporary) thermal stratification and buoyant cyanobacteria to accu-
mulate in the epilimnion. (c): Without wind, buoyant cyanobacteria float
up and form surface blooms. (d): low wind speed causes the displacement
of surface blooms and formation of scums at downwind sites. Note that
cell numbers, chlorophyll-a (chl-a) and MC concentrations are only crude
estimates to illustrate the order of magnitude of possible spatial heteroge-
neities and must not be taken as reference values.
At times, surface blooms can develop into scums when cyanobacteria accu-
mulated at the water surface are further concentrated by horizontal drift,
generally at downwind sites (Figure 4.2). Scum formation is typically
restricted to parts of a waterbody only, but strongly affects water quality in
terms of odour, appearance and sometimes extremely high concentrations of
cyanotoxins. When scums are not dissolved after a short time, for example,
by wind or wave action, massive cell lysis may set in as a result of unadapted
cells being exposed to full sunlight and additional stress factors such as high
222 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
temperature or depleted inorganic carbon (Ibelings & Maberly, 1998). This
can consequently result in the massive release of cyanotoxins and phyco-
cyanin, indicated by bluish plaques, often accompanied by a strong and
unpleasant odour.
4.1.3 L ight harvesting
Cyanobacteria contain phycocyanin and phycoerythrin as photosynthetic
pigments in addition to chlorophyll-a. These harvest light in the green, yel-
low and orange parts of the solar spectrum (500–650 nm), which is not
commonly used by other phytoplankton species. Cyanobacteria therefore
are efficient at light harvesting and generally have the capacity to grow at
very low light intensities. This applies in particular to the most filamentous
forms, especially for Planktothrix, which ranks among the best competitors
for light (Reynolds, 1997).
In contrast, while colony formation – for example, of Microcystis – offers
advantages such as buoyancy and grazing protection, it also has disadvan-
tages: it diminishes the capacity for light harvesting (and also for nutrient
uptake) because in a colony, the cells’ surface-to-volume ratio is reduced,
and as a consequence, the overall growth rate is also lower. In fact, Reynolds
(1997) ranks Microcystis among the poorest resource competitors and slow-
est growing species in the phytoplankton – would it not have the potential
for flotation and buoyancy regulation, it would probably not be a strong
competitor in the phytoplankton community (Ibelings et al., 1994).
4.1.4 C arbon concentrating mechanisms
Cyanobacteria have a carbon concentrating mechanism (CCM), which
allows the CO -fixing enzyme RUBISCO to operate efficiently. The first
2
part of the CCM consists of various inorganic carbon uptake systems, two
for CO and three for bicarbonate. The carbon, assimilated carbon in the
2
form of bicarbonate, is transported to specific cellular compartments con-
taining the enzyme carbonic anhydrase, known as carboxysomes. Carbonic
anhydrase transforms bicarbonate (back) to CO , raising it to levels where
2
RUBISCO can perform optimally. Cyanobacterial taxa vary in the combi-
nation of carbon uptake systems present in the cell, and this allows them
to adapt to environments that differ in the availability of inorganic carbon
(Price et al., 2007; Sandrini et al., 2014).
4.1.5 R esistance to grazing and other losses
Cyanobacteria seem well equipped to minimise two loss factors that play a
major role in general phytoplankton dynamics: sedimentation and grazing
by zooplankton. Resistance to grazing is a widely studied and discussed
4 Conditions determining occurrence 223
subject, in part because it may form an important obstacle for the success
of biomanipulation (see section 8.7.1).
Toxicity, size of filaments or colonies, and poor nutritional quality may
prohibit an efficient grazing on cyanobacteria by zooplankton (Kurmayer &
Jüttner, 1999), but how well cyanobacteria are protected against grazing
by zooplankton is still under considerable scientific debate, with grazing
experiments and field studies showing different outcomes (Sarnelle, 1993;
Gragnani et al., 1999). For instance, it was shown that Daphnia carinata
fed on toxic cyanobacteria, including Microcystis colonies (Matveev et al.,
1994), while in the microcosm experiments of Mohamed (2001), daphnids
preferred green algae and diatoms over toxic Microcystis. Some of the ini-
tial studies demonstrating cyanobacterial toxicity against grazers seem to
have been based upon a restricted selection of zooplankton taxa and cya-
nobacterial strains (Wilson et al., 2006a), and grazers that originate from
lakes with a history of cyanobacteria generally show stronger tolerance
against their toxins (Ger et al., 2016). Lemaire et al. (2012) studied how
the co-evolutionary history of grazers and cyanobacteria results in specific
grazer genotype and cyanobacterium genotype interactions that provide a
further explanation for the variable outcome of research on grazing of cya-
nobacteria. Furthermore, grazing by zooplankton other than cladocerans
may lead to very different observations: some rotifers, for example, are able
to feed on filamentous cyanobacteria and are adapted to the perceived low
food quality of cyanobacteria (Burian et al., 2014).
Likewise, the role of mussels in decimating cyanobacterial populations is
still under debate: (toxic) cyanobacterial blooms have reappeared in Lakes
Erie and Huron (USA), and this is partially interpreted as a result of zebra
mussel (Dreissena polymorpha) invasion (Vanderploeg et al., 2001) and their
selective rejection of Microcystis colonies as food. Dionisio Pires et al. (2005)
and Baker et al. (1998) showed a positive selection for cyanobacteria (and
other phytoplankton), indicating that grazing effects of mussels on cyanobac-
teria are not yet well understood (Raikow et al., 2004). Phytoplanktivorous
fish are largely absent from temperate lakes, but in (sub)tropical regions, fish
such as silver carp and bighead carp have been shown to filter feed on cyano-
bacteria (Zhang et al., 2008), thus potentially controlling Microcystis blooms
(reviewed in Triest et al., 2016).
Besides grazing, losses through infection by fungal parasites, phages and
heterotrophic bacteria have been recognised as potentially important driv-
ers of cyanobacterial population dynamics (Box 4.3; Steenhauer et al., 2016;
Yoshida-Takashima et al., 2012; Rohrlack et al., 2013; Van Wichelen et al.,
2010). Respective losses may not affect the entire populations but only selected
genotypes, thus contributing to the clonal dynamics in cyanobacterial blooms
(Van Wichelen et al., 2016; Agha et al., 2018). Recognition, and in particular,
quantification of losses through microbial interactions in waterbodies, is still
only in the beginnings.
224 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
BOX 4.3: EMERGING INSIGHTS INTO
THE ROLE OF CYANOPHAGES
Helena L. Pound, Steven W. Wilhelm
While viruses are well documented in marine systems and virus-induced
cell lysis contributes to the conversion of microbial biomass into dissolved
organic matter, less is known about their role in freshwaters, particularly
for cyanobacteria. Yoshida et al. (2006) isolated and sequenced the first
phage capable of lysing Microcystis aeruginosa, proposing that it might act as
a controlling agent in seasonal blooms. While the effect of phage on growth,
proliferation, and biomass of Microcystis populations has not been fully elu-
cidated, community-sequencing studies have provided further insight. A
metatranscriptomic analysis of a 2014 Microcystis bloom in Lake Erie showed
an increased frequency of Microcystis phage transcripts at the termination
of the bloom, with approximately one virus marker transcript for every
host marker (Steffen et al., 2017), implying a massive population-level infec-
tion. This lytic infection was associated with a spike in detected microcystin
concentrations in the raw water of the city of Toledo’s drinking-water
supply, reaching up to >5 μg/L. The working hypothesis arising from the
observation is that virus-infected cells lysed and released cell-associated
toxin into the water.
In contrast, a similar analysis of a Microcystis bloom in Taihu (Lake Tai,
China) in 2014 showed a different effect associated with the Microcystis
phage. That study observed the formation of lysogens with the association
of the phage with the host genome (Stough et al., 2017). In this manner,
Microcystis hosts may have resisted subsequent infections by other lytic
phage, allowing for longer bloom maintenance. Indeed, Kuno et al. (2012)
found that repeated exposure to a high diversity of phages leaves traces
in the genomes of Microcystis strains, including molecular defence mecha-
nisms. These studies provide evidence that viral infections can be relevant
both in the dynamics of Microcystis blooms and in the release of otherwise
cell-bound toxins.
4.1.6 O verwintering strategies
In (sub)tropical regions, cyanobacteria can produce perennial blooms, whereas
in temperate ones, they are often subject to pronounced seasonal changes
in environmental conditions. Phytoplankton populations – including cyano-
bacteria – usually decline in winter because a decrease in daily insolation and
4 Conditions determining occurrence 225
increased mixing depth minimise light availability for photosynthesis. In the
next growing season, the size of the inoculum of overwintering cells can
be decisive for the outcome of competition between phytoplankton spe-
cies for light and nutrients, and overwintering strategies are therefore an
important trait for attaining high levels of biomass and/or dominance in
the phytoplankton.
Microcystis typically blooms in (late) summer, and its biomass decreases in
autumn when growth conditions become less favourable. Part of the colonies
can sink to the lake bottom (Reynolds et al., 1981; Takamura et al., 1984).
Verspagen et al. (2004) demonstrated that viable colonies, capable of pho-
tosynthesis, were present in large numbers in and on the sediment not only
in winter but throughout the year. Several studies (Takamura et al., 1984;
Boström et al., 1989) found that the total amount of Microcystis in the sedi-
ment can be much higher than in the water column, even during Microcystis
blooms. Preston et al. (1980) observed that recruitment of Microcystis from
the sediment to the water takes place before the establishment of the sum-
mer bloom, so that this recruitment may be a crucial factor that initiates the
bloom (Ihle et al., 2005).
Filamentous cyanobacteria like Planktothrix agardhii seem to follow
a different strategy. Even in temperate climates, they may prevail or even
bloom throughout the year in eutrophic systems. In some situations, they
prevent competing phytoplankton from growing by maintaining the system
turbid and light availability too low for microalgae to compete efficiently
(Scheffer et al., 1997; Ibelings et al., 2007).
The annual cycle of Planktothrix rubescens in Lake Zürich studied by
Walsby & Schanz (2002) shows a specific time pattern for this species:
deep winter mixing of the lake entrained the metalimnetic population of P.
rubescens. About half of the filaments survived this winter period, whereas
others lost their gas vesicles because of the hydrostatic pressure resulting
from deep winter mixing. After annual stratification in spring, the surviv-
ing filaments resumed their position in the metalimnion.
A number of cyanobacteria produce specific resting cells called akine-
tes that sink to the sediment where they can survive for extended peri-
ods of time (see Chapter 3). These include, in particular, the N -fixing
2
taxa Anabaena, Dolichospermum, Aphanizomenon and Raphidiopsis.
Recruitment and germination of akinetes from the sediment contributes
to bloom onset, and prolonged benthic recruitment may strongly promote
the presence of respective species (Karlsson‐Elfgren et al., 2003). Several
factors, especially light and temperature, determine their germination
(Karlsson-Elfgren et al., 2004; Wiedner et al., 2007). Cirés et al. (2013)
show how blooms of Dolichospermum circinale and D. flosaquae are both
initiated and maintained in the Murray River (Australia) by the germina-
tion of akinetes that are present in the sediment, although vegetative cells
also overwinter in the water.
226 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
4.2 W HERE DO WHICH CYANOBACTERIA OCCUR?
Cyanobacteria causing toxin concentrations of concern for human health are
usually planktonic, that is, suspended in the water. However, as mentioned
above, some forms grow on surfaces. As discussed in Chapter 3, “benthic”
or “epiphytic” cyanobacteria do so continuously until they are physically
detached and dislocated to the surface or beaches. “Tychoplanktonic”
c yanobacteria inhabit surfaces, including those of submersed aquatic plants,
and may at times also be suspended in the water.
4.2.1 P lanktonic cyanobacteria
As a taxonomic group, cyanobacteria are highly successful in colonising a
wide variety of habitats – with numerous special adaptations to extreme
environmental conditions, for example, resistance to high concentrations
of copper and zinc, tolerance of low oxygen conditions and of free sul-
phide, high tolerance of UV-B and UV-C as well as of high temperature (see
Whitton, 2012).
Due to their small size and the extremely high abundance, it is frequently
argued that microbial species are globally ubiquitous, growing and mul-
tiplying where they find suitable conditions (“Baas Becking h ypothesis –
everything is everywhere but the environment selects”; Finlay, 2002).
Accordingly, geographic barriers would not restrict the global distribution
of particular taxa, and indeed, cyanobacterial species are cosmopolitan in
general and not restricted to geographic regions like, for example, many
higher plants (Pridmore & Etheredge, 1987). Later observations, however,
suggest that geographic variation in microbial diversity is apparently more
common than originally expected (Martiny et al., 2006), which could well
be because the environment – which clearly varies between regions – selects
indeed, as postulated in the second part of the Baas Becking hypothesis. A
(potentially) global distribution of a particular species does, however, not
imply genetic homogeneity across the globe. Regional and local differences
in genotype occurrence can cause differences in the distribution of (toxic)
secondary metabolites. For example, as strains of Raphidiopsis raciborskii
differ genetically between geographic regions (see below), cylindrosper-
mopsin (CYN) production was found only for Australian strains, while
not for European or South American ones (Neilan et al., 2003; Piccini
et al., 2011).
While it is impossible to prove that a specific taxon is absent from a
given location, documented observations of occurrence provide some
indication of which species to expect or not to expect under which con-
ditions. Furthermore, in analogy to plant-sociological groupings for ter-
restrial plants, phytoplankton, including cyanobacteria, can be grouped
4 Conditions determining occurrence 227
in associations of species that typically occur under specific conditions
(Reynolds et al., 2002, updated by Padisák et al., 2009). Box 4.4 shows
how a grouping on the basis of key functional traits of cyanobacteria helps
to reduce – taxonomic – complexity and to understand why certain cyano-
bacteria occur under certain conditions. Moreover, the close association
between cyanobacterial traits and preferred environmental conditions can
provide guidance in selecting the most promising measures for successful
control of cyanobacterial blooms (Mantzouki et al., 2016).
BOX 4.4: CYANOBACTERIAL FUNCTIONAL GROUPS
BASED ON THE CLASSIFICATION BY REYNOLDS (2006)
Evanthia Mantzouki
A functional group is defined by containing species with similar morphological
and physiological traits, and ecological functioning (see Padisák et al., 2009
and Salmaso et al., 2015). Reynolds (2006) clustered species on the basis of
the typical habitats in which they occur, morphological traits such as shape
and dimension or specialised structures such as gas vesicles and heterocytes,
as well as functional traits that are linked to resource acquisition, optimum
growth temperatures and toxin production. From the extensive list given
by Reynolds (2006), the table below (modified after Mantzouki et al., 2016)
selects the functional groups with cyanobacteria, listing typical representative
taxa and highlighting environmental tolerances and key sensitivities. This may
aid in finding suitable management actions to control cyanobacteria. The clas-
sification is simplified compared to Reynolds (2006) and Padisák et al. (2009)
by combining groups that are found in similar habitats and, more importantly,
require similar management actions, that is, the S1/S2, H1/H2 and LO/LM
groups. Notable differences in the various preferred habitats of the combined
groups are as follows: S2 species prefer warmer mixed and alkaline waters
compared to those in group S1; H2 taxa are found in mesotrophic lakes with
high light conditions, and although H1 taxa are found in more eutrophic lakes,
their nitrogen content is relatively low; LO taxa are found in medium to large
lakes, while LM species occur in small to medium-sized lakes. Note that the
most frequently occurring, typical taxa are given in bold.
Adapted by permission from Springer Nature, Aquatic Ecology, Understanding
the key ecological traits of cyanobacteria as a basis for their management and
control in changing lakes. Mantzouki E, Visser PM, Bormans M, Ibelings BW
(2016). Copyright Springer Nature 2016. www.springernature.com/gp.
228 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
stiarT
–
seitivitisneS
tnemeganaM
mumitpO
ecruoseR
/epahS/eziS
snoitcA
secnareloT
snixoT
ecnerefeR
.pmeT
noitisiuqcA
ytilainoloC
axaT
lacipyT
tatibaH
puorG
ecnediser
trohSycneicfied
thgiL
,sCM
)6791(
.la
te
yoF
C°
5.72–02
tneicfifE
/mμ 0001>–3
xirhtotknalP
wollahS
S/S 2
1
emit
sNYC
.la
te
gnilrüL
thgil
yratilos
iihdraga
dexim
dibruT
)3102(
gnitsevrah
stnemalfi
iekeder
xirhtonmiL
sreyal
aneabanaduesP
acitenmil
aybgnylotknalP
atrotnoc aripsorhtrA
sispoidihpaR
ecnediser
trohS
N
dna
thgiL
,sCM
.la
te
dnairB
C°
53–92
negortiN
/mμ
005–5
sispoidihpaR
dexim
mraW
S N
emit
ycneicfied
,sNYC
)4002(
noitaxfi
yratilos
aneabanA
sreyal
,sXTA
lukmodunohC
setenikA
stnemalfi
amissitunim
sXTS
)4002(
.la
te
&
rekaS
shtfifirG
)0002(
.la
te
trenheM
)0102(
gnixim
peeD
Hp
hgiH
sCM
atad
oN
lainoloC
/mμ
2–2.0
aspaconahpA
ro
sekal
wollahS
K
/lacirehps
ecehtonahpA
fo
noinmilipe
seinoloc
noytcidonayC
sekal
peed
cihportuE
)
deunitnoC(
4 Conditions determining occurrence 229
stiarT
–
seitivitisneS
tnemeganaM
mumitpO
ecruoseR
/epahS/eziS
snoitcA
secnareloT
snixoT
ecnerefeR
.pmeT
noitisiuqcA
ytilainoloC
axaT
lacipyT
tatibaH
puorG
–
ycneicfied
thgiL
C
dna
N
,sCM
regnilheU
C°
93–72
noitaxfi
N
yratiloS
mumrepsohciloD
ot
-ogilO
H/H 2
1
gnixim
ycneicfied
,sNYC
)1891(
ycnayouB
stnemalfi
,eauqa-sofl
cihportue
–
ycneicfied
P
,sXTA
enurB
& kavoN
noitaluger
,sediorips
.D
ot
wollahS
tneirtun
sXTS
)5891(
egarots
P
elanicric
.D
peed
esaerced
setenikA
eauqasofl
.A
innamremmel
.D
aihcirtoeolG atalunihce
–
ycneicfied
thgiL
ycneicfied
C
sCM
&
okjawelaN
C°
43–82
ycnayouB
/mμ
002>–2
sitsycorciM
ot
-ogilO
L/
L
M
O
gnixim
noitacfiitarts
)1002(
yhpruM
noitaluger
/lacirehps
ainihcinoroW
cihportue
.la te
iamI
seinoloc
aidepomsireM
ot
wollahS
)9002(
peed
& samohT
egral
ot
llamS
namhctiL )6102(
ecnediser
trohSnoitalosni
hgiH
sCM
.la te
iamI
C°
92–02
ycnayouB
/mμ
002>–2
sitsycorciM
llamS
M
gnihsufl
–
emit
)9002(
noitaluger
/lacirehps
iigrebnesew
cihportuE
–
ycneicfied
thgiL
.la
te akustO
seinoloc
muvacoreahpS
tnettimretnI
gnixim
)9991(
sisneilisarb
gnixim
lacisyhP
ycneicfied
thgiL
sCM
.la
te
suahrebO
C°
32–51
ycnayouB
/mμ 0001>–3
xirhtotknalP
cihportoseM
R
–
ytilibatsni
gnortS
)7002(
noitaluger
yratilos
snecsebur
defiitartS
gnixim
noitagerges
ybslaW
& thgirB
tneicfifE
stnemalfi
,iitoeguom
.P
noinmilatem
)0002(
thgil
asomil
.P
nnamremmiZ
gnitsevrah
aybgnylotknalP
)9691(
230 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Prochlorococcus is probably the most abundant cyanobacterium,
numerically dominating the oligotrophic areas of tropical and subtropical
oceans, followed by marine Synechococcus and Trichodesmium. Planktonic
freshwater cyanobacteria contribute only a relatively small percentage of
the global cyanobacterial biomass as surface freshwaters are only a small
fraction of the global surface water (Garcia-Pichel et al., 2003).
Microcystis species have a cosmopolitan distribution and have fre-
quently been reported from lakes worldwide, from temperate to tropical
zones of both hemispheres. They occur in a range of waterbodies, typi-
cally (though not exclusively) proliferating at temperatures above 15 °C
and under mesotrophic to eutrophic conditions. While thermal stratifi-
cation may give them a competitive advantage, Microcystis occurs both
in thermally stratified lakes (generally deeper than 6 m) and in relatively
shallow, polymictic waterbodies which show recurrent periods of re-strat-
ification and mixing, allowing Microcystis to benefit from its buoyancy
(Ibelings et al., 1991).
The widespread filamentous species Planktothrix agardhii is a typi-
cal and frequently reported species for shallow temperate lakes, particu-
larly in the Northern Hemisphere (Suda et al., 2002). It tolerates a wide
range of temperatures, and in some regions (e.g., lowland areas of the
Netherlands and northern Germany), it perennially dominates (or domi-
nated) shallow eutrophic and hypertrophic waterbodies for many years
(Van Liere & Mur, 1980; Mur, 1983; Rücker et al., 1997). However, it is
also reported from subtropical climatic regions in South America (Kruk
et al., 2002), Australia (Baker & Humpage, 1994) and from the temperate
climatic region of New Zealand (Pridmore & Etheredge, 1987). Because
this species is a superior competitor under conditions of low light avail-
ability, Planktothrix agardhii – sometimes together with Limnothrix –
generates a positive feedback loop, creating a “shaded” environment in
which it can hardly be outcompeted by other phytoplankton (Scheffer
et al., 1997).
The nitrogen-fixing genera, Dolichospermum and Aphanizomenon,
typically occur in larger mesotrophic lakes (Dokulil & Teubner, 2000;
Reynolds et al., 2002) promoted by surface warming, high light and
phosphorus levels together with low nitrogen concentrations (see section
4.2.3). Species of Dolichospermum and Anabaenopsis have been reported
from all five continents, occurring in temperate regions of the Northern
and the Southern Hemisphere as well as in subtropical and tropical cli-
matic regions. As the chemical reduction of atmospheric nitrogen is energy
demanding, these taxa typically proliferate in environments with high light
availability, that is, fairly clear water, rather than in turbid, highly eutro-
phic systems. Species of Aphanizomenon have been widely reported from
temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere (Konopka, 1989; Barker
et al., 2000; Porat et al., 2001) as well as from subtropical regions (Porat
et al., 2001), from Australia (Baker & Humpage, 1994) and from South
4 Conditions determining occurrence 231
America (Kruk et al., 2002). Frequently, Aphanizomenon flosaquae occurs
codominant together with Microcystis (Teubner et al., 1999).
Raphidiopsis raciborskii has originally been considered a tropical species,
first described from Java (Gugger et al., 2005a). R. raciborskii was first reported
in Europe during the 1930s (Padisák, 1997) and appeared to invade temper-
ate regions of Europe during the 1990s (e.g., Dokulil & Mayer, 1996; Briand
et al., 2004). However, newer genetic and ecophysiological analysis demon-
strated that R. raciborskii shows positive net growth over a wide range of
temperatures (20–35 °C) (Briand et al., 2004), and rather than spreading from
warm refuge areas across the American and European continents, it shows
distinct and geographically separate ecotypes (Gugger et al., 2005b; Haande
et al., 2008), which also differ with respect to producing CYNs (Neilan et al.,
2003; Piccini et al., 2011; Antunes et al., 2015).
Other potentially toxin-producing cyanobacteria show a more restricted
pattern of geographic occurrence. Mass developments of the red-pigmented,
filamentous Planktothrix rubescens have been reported frequently over sev-
eral decades but largely from thermally stratified lakes and reservoirs across
Europe (e.g., Skulberg & Skulberg, 1985; Feuillade, 1994; Barco et al.,
2004; Gallina et al., 2017), North America (e.g., Edmondson & Litt, 1982;
Nürnberg et al., 2003) and New Zealand (Pridmore & Etheredge, 1987). In
these waterbodies, they typically inhabit the thin layer between warm sur-
face water and the cold deep layer, called the metalimnion. Waterbody mix-
ing can distribute the filaments throughout the whole water column, thus
causing a distinctly visible reddish discoloration (Nürnberg et al., 2003).
Their preferred habitat in the metalimnion may be the reason why P. rube-
scens populations are sensitive to eutrophication, since having enough light
in these depths for growth depends on water being relatively clear in the
epilimnion. In peri-alpine lakes such as Lake Hallwil (Switzerland) or Lake
Bourget (France), P. rubescens (re)appeared as nutrient levels declined and
water became clearer and disappeared again only after total phosphorus
(TP) had further declined to very low concentrations (e.g., below 10 μg/L
in Lake Bourget; Jacquet et al., 2014). In Lake Constance, at similarly low
phosphorous levels, metalimnetic blooms of P. rubescens have reappeared
since 2014, and in other lakes like Lake Zurich (Switzerland), it shows little
response to decreases in TP concentrations (Schanz, 1994; Gammeter &
Zimmermann, 2001; Posch et al., 2012).
Nodularia spumigena has been reported from marine and brackish waters –
typically estuaries and coastal lagoons of Southern Australia (Francis, 1878;
Jones et al., 1994) and less frequently in alkaline, brackish lakes (Bolch
et al., 1999). In addition, it has been reported from brackish coastal lakes
in New Zealand (Carmichael et al., 1988), South Africa and the North
Sea (Nehring, 1993). Nodularia spumigena regularly forms blooms in the
Baltic Sea (Bianchi et al., 2000). Notably, a freshwater strain of Nodularia
originally isolated from a benthic mat in a thermal source also produced the
nodularin (Beattie et al., 2000).
232 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
4.2.2 B enthic and tychoplanktonic cyanobacteria
Benthic cyanobacteria generally need a substrate to attach to, like sediment
(“epipsammic”), pebbles or stones (“epilithic”) or macrophytes (“epiphytic”),
while “tychoplanktonic” includes phases of planktonic occurrence. Benthic
cyanobacteria occur in a variety of freshwater and marine habitats, includ-
ing wetlands, lakes, coral reefs and estuaries, hypersaline and geothermal
ponds, streams and rivers (Scott & Marcarelli, 2012). Water transparency
allowing light to penetrate to the bottom is a prerequisite for the growth.
While planktonic cyanobacteria are well known to thrive in eutrophic condi-
tions, benthic cyanobacterial proliferation is common in oligotrophic envi-
ronments such as alpine lakes or headwater streams with sufficient substrate
stability to enable cyanobacterial growth (Scott & Marcarelli, 2012). Where
lakes and reservoirs become clearer in consequence of successful reduction of
nutrient loads, benthic, epiphytic and/or tychoplanktonic planktonic cyano-
bacteria may replace planktonic ones, thus causing new exposure scenarios:
while the health risk from cyanotoxins in the bulk water declines, a more
localised risk may then arise in the vicinity of detached mats of benthic cya-
nobacteria or of macrophyte tufts containing cyanobacteria – either floating
or beached. It is therefore important to observe the possible expansion of
such taxa in the course of restoration efforts (Shams et al., 2015).
Some benthic species form mats which can grow on a wide range of sub-
strates such as fine sediment, rocks, artificial substrates and aquatic plants.
These cyanobacterial-dominated mats usually range from a few millimetres
to several centimetres in thickness, although when environmental condi-
tions are favourable, they can continue to grow and become much thicker.
As benthic, cyanobacteria-dominated mats are increasingly being investi-
gated for cyanotoxins worldwide, these are increasingly being found, par-
ticularly in wadeable streams, littoral zones of lakes and coastal lagoons
(Fetscher et al., 2015; Cantoral Uriza et al., 2017). For both, freshwater
and marine benthic taxa, occurrence is often highly variable on small spa-
tial scales of metres or less. In shallow marine environments in tropical
and subtropical zones, Moorea (formerly Lyngbya) and other benthic taxa
potentially producing toxins can occur (see also section 2.6).
In freshwater, the dominant cyanobacterial taxa in the mats are usu-
ally filamentous Oscillatoriales, including Oscillatoria, Microcoleus,
Phormidium, Microseira, Moorea (formerly Lyngbya), Leptolyngbya,
Tychonema, Calothrix and Schizothrix. The Chroococcales Aphanothece
and Synechococcus are also common components of the mats, with some
reports of mats dominated by these genera, for example, in hot spring
environments. Among the nitrogen-fixing Nostocales, the most frequently
reported genera are Anabaena, Scytonema and Nostoc (Quiblier et al.,
2013, Wood et al., 2020). Although dominated by cyanobacteria, the mats
usually contain many other organisms (e.g., heterotrophic bacteria and
eukaryotic algae) and inorganic matter (e.g., sediment) bound together by
4 Conditions determining occurrence 233
extracellular polymeric substances (McAllister et al., 2016). Over 20 spe-
cies of benthic cyanobacteria are known to produce a range of cyanotox-
ins, similarly wide as that of planktonic species, that is, MCs, nodularins,
CYNs, saxitoxins and anatoxins. Toxicity that could not be attributed
to any of the known cyanotoxins has also been identified (Quiblier et al.,
2013). As in planktonic cyanobacteria, both toxic and nontoxic genotypes
of a given species usually coexist within mats (Cadel-Six et al., 2007) and
cyanotoxin content can be highly variable spatially and temporally. Little
is known about factors which may upregulate toxin production or promote
the dominance of toxic over nontoxic strains. However, again as for the
planktonic cyanobacteria, the abundance of toxic genotypes appears to be
the key contributor to toxin content variability among benthic cyanobacte-
rial-dominated mats (Wood & Puddick, 2017).
In contrast to planktonic cyanobacteria, research exploring factors that
regulate the growth and expansion of benthic cyanobacterial-dominated
mats has been relatively limited, and detailed studies are restricted to a few
taxa from specific environments. In general, the variables that have been
identified as most important in regulating the proliferation of benthic cya-
nobacterial mats are physical disturbance (wet–dry cycles, wave action,
shear stress, abrasion), light, temperature, nutrients and grazing. Once
mats are established, they contain diverse microbial communities and these
taxa appear to play a vital role in cycling nutrients within the mat (Bouma-
Gregson et al., 2019). This is in concert with internal biogeochemical condi-
tions, which have been shown to facilitate the release of phosphorus from
sediment trapped in the mats, leading to nutrient conditions within mats
that are very different to those of the overlying water. For example, Wood
et al. (2015) showed that dissolved reactive phosphorus concentrations in
water extracted from benthic cyanobacterial mats was over 300 times higher
than in the stream water. These nutrient-rich within-mat conditions prob-
ably partly explain how cyanobacterial-dominated mats can form very high
biomass in nutrient-replete environments.
A synthesis of research results on the anatoxin-producing mat-forming spe-
cies Microcoleus autumnalis (formerly Phormidium autumnale) in wadeable
streams in New Zealand shows that Microcoleus proliferations are most likely
to occur when there is slightly elevated dissolved inorganic nitrogen during
the colonisation phase, but when water column dissolved reactive phosphorus
is less than 0.01 mg/L. Once established, Microcoleus-dominated mats trap
sediment, and biochemical conditions within the mats can mobilise sediment-
bound phosphorus which is then available for growth. These streams are
highly dynamic systems and the mats are primarily removed through shear
stress and substrate disturbance, although there is also evidence for autogenic
(natural) detachment. As cyanobacterial-dominated mats mature and biomass
increases, oxygen bubbles, produced through photosynthesis, become trapped
among the cyanobacteria and the extracellular polymeric substances they pro-
duce, causing the mat to become buoyant and detach from the substrate.
234 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Tychonema species have repeatedly been recorded in lakes of the temper-
ate zones (Salmaso et al., 2016). Tychonema spp. can produce neurotox-
ins, primarily anatoxins. These filamentous cyanobacteria primarily grows
in stands of macrophytes but can occasionally be found in plankton sam-
ples and has been identified as the cause of dog deaths where these ingest
Tychonema together with decaying macrophyte material accumulated at
the shoreline (Fastner et al., 2018).
The health risk that benthic cyanobacteria proliferations pose to humans
is still relatively unknown. There have been numerous cases of domestic and
wildlife poisoning following the ingestion of cyanobacterial mats (Quiblier
et al., 2013; McAllister et al., 2016). Anecdotal reports of human illness
after recreating in streams containing cyanobacterial proliferations are doc-
umented, but conclusive evidence is lacking. As long as the mats are attached
to the substrate, the risks of human ingestion are probably limited. However,
detached mats often accumulate at the banks of rivers, streams and lakes,
where animals are much more likely to consume them (Quiblier et al., 2013;
McAllister et al., 2016, Wood et al., 2020). Dogs may be attracted to them
by the smell of the decaying material, and numerous cases of dog deaths
have been documented, sometimes with cyanobacterial cells and cyanotox-
ins found in their stomachs (Wood et al., 2007; Fastner et al., 2018). For
some species, “free” toxin, that is, dissolved in water, can be detected in lake
and stream water, although the concentrations are usually well below drink-
ing-water guideline values (Wood et al., 2018). Assessing risks for human
health is challenging in situations where deaths of pets and wildlife have
been observed, while the water appears clear and toxin concentrations in the
water are low or nondetectable. In such situations, it is best to inform users
about the situation, to show what the mats look like and to advise avoiding
contact with floating or beached benthic material (see Chapter 15).
4.3 W HICH ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS FAVOUR
CYANOBACTERIAL DOMINANCE?
Phytoplankton communities generally consist of species belonging to diverse
taxonomic groups of photosynthetically active microorganisms. Yet the for-
mation of massive, long-lasting blooms to the extent known from cyanobacte-
ria is rarely reported for eukaryotic microalgae such as desmids, chrysophytes
or chlorophytes, for example. Specific environmental conditions strongly
favour the dominance of certain cyanobacterial taxa over other taxa of both
cyanobacteria and microalgae. Understanding these conditions is important
for management, allowing us to estimate under which conditions to expect
cyanobacterial blooms. Key abiotic conditions determining phytoplankton
growth rates and the outcome of competition between species are the avail-
ability of resources (nutrients and light), temperature, mixing regime, flush-
ing rate and pH. In addition, biological interactions, including resource and
4 Conditions determining occurrence 235
Table 4.1 Trophic state categories and their definition as given by Vollenweider &
Kerekes (1982)
Chl-a Chl-a Transparency Transparency
TP mean mean maximum mean maximum
Trophic state μg/L μg/L μg/L m m
Ultraoligotrophic ≤ 4 ≤ 1 ≤ 2.5 ≥ 6 ≥ 12
Oligotrophic ≤ 10 ≤ 2.5 ≤ 8 ≥ 3 ≥ 6
Mesotrophic 10 – 35 2.5 – 8 8 – 25 3 – 1.5 6 – 3
Eutrophic 35 – 100 8 – 25 25 – 75 1.5 – 0.7 3 – 1.5
Hypertrophic ≥ 100 ≥ 25 ≥ 75 ≤ 0.7 ≤ 1.5
TP: total phosphorus concentration; Chl-a: chlorophyll-a concentration; Transparency measured
as Secchi depth readings; see Chapter 13.
competition, grazing by zooplankton, phage infection and lysis (Stough et al.,
2017; Šulčius et al., 2018; Box 4.3) as well as parasitism (Frenken et al.,
2017; Agha et al., 2018), can play a decisive role, and these are included in
the discussion below.
4.3.1 T he concept of “trophic state”
This concept integrates a classification of levels of nutrient concentra-
tions with their outcome in terms of phytoplankton biomass and turbidity.
Initially, Vollenweider & Kerekes (1982) proposed a classification of five
trophic states based on data from lakes in temperate climates (Table 4.1).
This classification uses the annual mean concentration of total phosphorus
(TP) as the chief limiting nutrient in these waterbodies (see section 4.3.2
and Box 4.5), annual mean and maximum concentrations of chlorophyll-a
as measure of phytoplankton biomass (see Box 4.6), as well as water trans-
parency, measured as Secchi disc reading (see Chapter 13).
BOX 4.5: N LIMITATION VERSUS P LIMITATION:
SCIENTIFIC CONTROVERSY OR CONSENSUS?
Vollenweider’s (1968) keystone report on the scientific background of eutro-
phication of inland waters starts with the sentence “Nitrogen and phosphorus
appear to be the most important among the nutrients responsible for eutro-
phication”. Since then, the debate whether N or P or both are responsible for
eutrophication has not ceased and with it, the discussion on approaches how
to revert eutrophication is ongoing (Schindler, 2006). During the last decades
of the 20th century, eutrophication control of freshwaters largely focused on
P with success in many cases. One reason is that P does not, unlike N, have an
236 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
unlimited atmospheric reservoir: N can be imported into the surface water
by N fixation; also in shallow waterbodies, it can be exported by denitrifica-
tion and thus potentially be lost more quickly than P, which may be recycled
between the sediment and water if water exchange rates are low (Shatwell &
Köhler, 2019). As phases of N limitation are common in many shallow water-
bodies, some authors have concluded that therefore N needs to be reduced
together with P (Conley et al., 2009; Paerl et al., 2016).
The controversy of P versus N limitation can be exemplified with a series of
publications on Lake 227. This small experimental lake has been fertilised for
37 years with constant annual inputs of P and decreasing inputs of N. Even after
ceasing N fertilisation, the phytoplankton abundance remained on an “eutro-
phic” level, leading Schindler et al. (2008) to the conclusion that attempts to
reduce eutrophication by reducing N loads are compensated by cyanobacterial
N fixation and hence reducing N loading as a management tool may be futile.
This conclusion was challenged by re-analysing the same data set by Scott &
McCarthy (2010) who found a decline of phytoplankton biomass after N fer-
tilisation stopped with a rate of some 6% per year. With four more years of
data, this trend, however, could not be verified, thus supporting the original
conclusion (Paterson et al., 2011). In turn, Scott & McCarthy (2011) argued that
N limitation may nonetheless be present but will affect phytoplankton biomass
only after a time delay. Yet a few years later, Higgins et al. (2018) suggest that
N limitation is still not significantly affecting this phytoplankton community.
This example shows how difficult it is to reach unambiguous conclusions
since even a small lake is a very complex ecosystem. On a larger scale, Elser
et al. (2007) showed that both increased N and P lead to increased biomass
in freshwater as well as in marine and terrestrial ecosystems, with most pro-
nounced responses for combined N and P fertilisation. It could therefore be
argued that both N and P inputs need to be reduced to effectively revert
eutrophication. Arguments held against this proposal (see review in Chorus &
Spijkerman, 2020) are that
1. Experiments adding both N and P show that if all other resources, par-
ticularly light, are available in surplus, adding both nutrients can lead to
higher biomass compared to adding of only N or only P. Such results,
however, do not allow the inverse conclusion, that is, that both must
be reduced to allow an efficient reduction of phytoplankton biomass.
Reducing either P or N alone likely would likely suffice to reduce bio-
mass, and the choice may be driven by practical considerations.
2. Even if N is currently limiting biomass, reducing P sufficiently will shift a
waterbody to P limitation.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 237
3. In many situations, P reduction is easier to achieve and results can be
predicted with less uncertainty (Chapters 7 and 8).
4. N limitation may shift species composition between cyanobacteria and
algal phytoplankton (Harris et al., 2014) and between cyanobacterial
taxa (Teubner et al., 1999; Dolman et al., 2012), and such shifts are, as
of yet, scarcely predictable. The concern that N limitation may pro-
mote N-fixing cyanobacteria (Schindler et al., 2008) has rarely proven
relevant in practice.
5. So far, successful cases of lake or reservoir restoration with substan-
tially reduced cyanobacterial biomass have been achieved by reducing
P (Fastner et al., 2016; Schindler et al., 2016); success due to reducing
N has scarcely been demonstrated (see Shatwell & Köhler (2019) for a
successful example).
Jeppesen et al. (2007) contributed to resolving this controversy with data
from 56 lakes showing that “if P can be reduced to low concentrations, N is
not likely to be of major importance”.
Reduction of P loads to many lakes and reservoirs has been successfully
achieved with techniques such as P elimination or P precipitation in sewage
treatment, appropriate use of mineral fertilisers, reduction of phosphates in
laundry detergents or a combination of any of these measures. Therefore,
from a practical point of view, P load reduction is often considered a first
choice for an efficient management tool to revert eutrophication of lakes and
reservoirs and thus to control cyanobacterial blooms.
However, ecological considerations, particularly for downstream coastal
areas, may also necessitate controlling N, and when planning measures to
control cyanobacteria, it may be effective to take this wider context into
account (Chapter 7). Particularly for shallow lakes with several months of N
limitation during summer, it is important to avoid any new N loads, and an
option to control cyanobacteria may be to seasonally target measures that
reduce prevalent N loads (see section 7.1).
This classification of trophic state may be adapted to local or regional
c ircumstances, and systems have been proposed with further “fine-tuning”
of the trophic state definitions: regional re-assessments of trophic state
boundaries are given, for example, by Nürnberg (1996) for North American
Lakes, including the impact of conditions such as lake morphometry, water
hardness and fulvic/humid acid concentrations, and by Salas & Martino
(1991) for warm-water lakes in Latin America and the Caribbean. Carlson
(1977) developed a widely used numerical trophic state index (TSI) ranging
238 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
from 0 to 100 and including Secchi depth, TP and chlorophyll-a concentra-
tions. In spite of controversy over details of the definition of each category
and its boundaries, the trophic state concept is widely used in practice. It is
valuable for cyanobacterial management, because a few general statements
apply to most cases:
• In oligotrophic waterbodies, planktonic cyanobacteria are unlikely
to attain cell densities that cause hazardous cyanotoxin concentra-
tions. However, benthic or epiphytic cyanobacteria may be present
and cover littoral sediments.
• In mesotrophic waterbodies, cyanobacterial blooms occur rarely;
exceptions include metalimnetic accumulations of Planktothrix rube-
scens (which may be at depths of drinking-water offtakes or come to
the surface, increasing risk of exposure), detached mats of benthic
cyanobacteria (see above) and – in large waterbodies – recruitment of
cyanobacteria (particularly of Dolichospermum) from low cell den-
sity but very large water volumes and surface areas to visible scums
along a downwind shoreline (section 4.5).
• In eutrophic and particularly hypertrophic waterbodies, cyanobacte-
ria occur frequently and abundantly, often constituting a major share
of the total phytoplankton biomass for extended parts of the year.
BOX 4.6: MONITORING TOTAL PHOSPHORUS AS
OPPOSED TO SOLUBLE PHOSPHATE FRACTIONS
Considerable confusion prevails in the use of the term “phosphate”. Historically,
soluble reactive phosphate (SRP), also termed “dissolved inorganic
phosphate” (DIP) or “orthophosphate”, has been measured and addressed
when dealing with phytoplankton growth, because this is the fraction of TP
which is directly available for uptake by cyanobacteria and algae. However,
recycling of phosphate molecules within the plankton communities is often
extremely rapid (within minutes), and phosphate liberated by the degradation
of organic material will be rapidly taken up by bacteria and algae. Furthermore,
cyanobacteria and algae can store enough phosphate for up to four cell divi-
sions, even if no SRP can be measured. If SRP is found above the detection
limits, this means that it is available in excess to the requirements of cyanobac-
teria and other phytoplankton. The only informational value of such a finding is
that P is being “left over” and growth is limited by some factors other than P.
The upper limit of the biomass of cyanobacteria and/or algae that can
develop in a given waterbody is, therefore, often largely determined by the
amount of P bound within the cells, and total phosphate phosphorus is
the variable that should be studied for biomass management. Strictly, this
4 Conditions determining occurrence 239
variable is not equivalent to total phosphorus (TP), which includes the
mineral form (like apatite) unavailable for biological uptake. However, mineral
forms are of quantitative importance only in particular waterbodies (e.g., with
high silt loading), and for the sake of simplification, TP has become widely
used to represent total phosphate phosphorus.
It is of importance to note that concentrations of TP refer to the molecular
weight of the phosphorus atom (30.97 g/mol) and not to that of phosphate
molecule (PO , 94.97 g/mol). Where this is not clearly stated, it has caused
4
considerable confusion in the literature.
“Eutrophication” is the process of nutrient enrichment with the conse-
quence of a massive increase in the biomass of phytoplankton – often in
particular of cyanobacteria – and reduced transparency. Eutrophication has
become a widespread problem in many regions of the world in the 1960s in
the wake of intensified application of mineral fertilisers, intensified animal
husbandry as well as urbanisation and increased sewage discharges causing
intensified nutrient loading to waterbodies. “Re-oligotrophication” is the
reverse of eutrophication, and measures to achieve this started being imple-
mented already in the late 1970s. While in some regions they are increas-
ingly showing success, with the trophic state of waterbodies decreasing, in
many regions eutrophication is still increasing, particularly in response to
clearing of land for settlements or for agricultural use.
4.3.2 N utrients
Phytoplankton biomass – that is, microalgae and cyanobacteria – chiefly
consists of carbon (C), oxygen (O), hydrogen (H), nitrogen (N) and phos-
phorus (P). Under the conditions of rapid growth not limited by shortage
of nutrients, it contains these elements in the following relative proportions
(known as Redfield ratio; Redfield (1934)), expressed either in molar ratios
or in mass units:
C N P
Molar ratios 106 16 1
Mass ratios 42 7 1
Higher ratios of C:P have been suggested by Anderson & Sarmiento
(1994) and Sterner et al. (2008). There is no lack of O and H in water,
and concentrations of C become limiting only in very acidic water – or
sometimes in extremely dense cyanobacterial blooms (Ibelings & Maberly,
240 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
1998). Thus, nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) are the key nutrients that
promote – or limit – the growth of cyanobacteria and other phytoplankton
in freshwaters. Although in consequence of the Redfield ratio, biomass pro-
duction requires only about 1 mole of P per 16 moles of N, in many types of
freshwater environments phosphorus is the resource which most frequently
limits phytoplankton growth, while N limitation occurs frequently but
often not for longer periods of time.
Nitrogen (N) may enter waterbodies leaching from soils particularly
after spreading of manure or fertiliser, as run-off from animal feed-
lots and sewage (see Chapter 7). It is also recycled within a waterbody
through the degradation of organic matter and excretion by animals.
Cyanobacteria – like microalgae – can take up inorganic dissolved nitro-
gen in the form of nitrate, nitrite and ammonium. While utilisation of
atmospheric nitrogen through diazotrophy has been considered unlikely
to fully supply the N demands of an aquatic ecosystem because this pro-
cess requires a high amount of energy (Conley et al., 2009; Moss et al.,
2013; Shatwell & Köhler, 2019), there are, however, case examples even
of quite turbid waterbodies like Sandusky Bay (Lake Erie, USA) in which
N fixation periodically contributes up to 85% of total N uptake of the
phytoplankton (Salk et al., 2018 and literature therein). Aquatic systems
loose dissolved inorganic nitrogen through denitrification: under anoxic
conditions, microorganisms use nitrate as source for oxidation processes,
thus reducing nitrate to atmospheric nitrogen (N ) which diffuses out of
2
the water into the atmosphere.
Phases of N limitation are common in many waterbodies (reviewed by
Sterner, 2008 and Søndergaard et al., 2017), in some pristine mountain
lakes (Diaz et al., 2007) and particularly in eutrophic waterbodies and dur-
ing warmer months in shallow zones with high rates of denitrification at the
sediment surface. N limitation is more frequent in some regions than in oth-
ers (Conley et al., 2009): for example, phytoplankton biomass is N-limited
in many lakes in South America (Soto, 2002) or in New Zealand (Abell et al.,
2010) – possibly due to lower rates of input from the atmosphere and/or less
use of nitrogen fertilisers (Schindler, 2006).
Excessive N concentrations have detrimental effects on aquatic macro-
phytes that are important competitors of phytoplankton, including cyano-
bacteria, in shallow lakes (Moss et al., 2013).
When assessing which nutrient is limiting phytoplankton biomass
at which time of the year, it is important to realise that N limitation is
unlikely if concentrations of dissolved inorganic N are above 30–100 μg/L
(Reynolds, 2006; Kolzau et al., 2014).
Phosphorus (P) enters waterbodies from sewage, animal feedlots and
soils, particularly if these were fertilised with minerals or manure (see
Chapter 7). As it binds to soil particles more effectively than nitrate, the
main entry route into waterbodies from land is as surface run-off, often
combined with erosion. Carvalho et al. (2013) evaluated a data set from
4 Conditions determining occurrence 241
more than 800 lakes of medium or high alkalinity in Europe and show
that cyanobacterial biomass generally increases in relation to the con-
centrations of total phosphorus (TP). Using large data sets from several
hundred waterbodies or the response of individual lakes to reduced TP
concentrations, several authors (discussed below in section 4.4) have found
that cyanobacterial biomass scarcely reaches health-relevant levels at TP
concentrations below 10 μg/L. In the concentration range of 20–100 μg/L,
TP strongly determines cyanobacterial biomass levels, while at the concen-
trations of TP exceeding 100 μg/L, curves level off and a further increase
in cyanobacterial biomass is rarely observed (in many cases because light
then becomes limiting).
P limitation is unlikely if concentrations of soluble reactive phosphorus
(SRP) are above 3–10 μg/L of P (Reynolds, 2006; see also discussion in
Kolzau et al., 2014).
N-, P- or light-limiting biomass carrying capacity: At any one point in
time, one resource will determine the maximum possible amount of phyto-
plankton biomass – a concept termed “carrying capacity” (Box 4.7), while
other resources may be available in excess. In turbid water or during winter
in temperate climates, light is usually the limiting resource, while the avail-
able N and P would allow a higher level of biomass. The limiting resource
may change seasonally, for example, light availability changes – at higher
latitudes – in relation to the angular height of the sun and day length, or – as
often the case in tropical climates – in relation to turbidity changes caused
by pronounced seasonality of the flow regime. Seasonal patterns of light, N
and P are likely to be quite specific for a given waterbody. Figure 4.3 shows a
conceptual model for a shallow lake in a temperate climate: as light intensity
increases in spring, phytoplankton begins to grow and incorporates avail-
able N and P into new biomass, depleting P to where it becomes limiting so
TN
TP
I*
rof
seiticapac
gniyrrac
ssamoib
notknalpotyhp
winter spring summer fall winter
Figure 4.3 Schematic model of the seasonal course of the carrying capacity for phytoplank-
ton biomass in the temperate zone of the Northern Hemisphere. Solid lines
indicate carrying capacities determined by light intensity (I*), total phosphorus
(TP) and total nitrogen (TN) as the most important limiting factors (Reynolds &
Maberly, 2002). The green area shows the resulting composite carrying capacity
for phytoplankton biomass. Adapted from Reynolds (1997).
242 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
that further increase of biomass is no longer possible – that is, biomass has
reached the carrying capacity of the system. In this model case, N is avail-
able in excess during most of the year, but by mid-summer, P availability
increases again through release from the sediment and N briefly becomes
the limiting resource. In autumn, it is once again light that limits carrying
capacity. At lower latitudes, the seasonal pattern for the light-limited car-
rying capacity is less pronounced – or determined by patterns of turbidity
caused by monsoon events.
BOX 4.7: THE ECOLOGICAL CONCEPT
OF CARRYING CAPACITY
The concept of an ecosystem carrying capacity has a long history in theoretical
ecology. Although intuitively easily accessible, the concept involves some com-
plexities due to differences in use in different fields, including ones that are not
related to ecology (Sayre, 2008) or ambiguities associated with mathematical
modelling (Gabriel et al., 2005; Mallet, 2012; Chapman & Byron, 2018).
In the definition given by Odum (1953), carrying capacity is the number of
individuals of a given species that a given habitat can support without being
permanently damaged. In this sense, the concept is largely applied to animals
such as mammals, bivalves or humans, and considers a long-term equilibrium
of the population with the entire environment (Begon et al., 1996).
In plankton ecology, the concept of carrying capacity has been adapted with
a somewhat different meaning: for one, it rather refers to the maximal popu-
lation or biomass density that can be reached at a given point in time – for
example, during late summer in temperate lakes – than to a persisting equilib-
rium population (Reynolds, 1984). Further, carrying capacity is differentiated
for each major resource: resource-specific carrying capacities are estimated
to determine which resource limits biomass in a given system at a given point
in time (Reynolds & Maberly, 2002).
In this volume, the term “carrying capacity” is used in this sense, as maxi-
mally attainable biomass in relation to a particular resource. This means ana-
lysing dynamics of individual carrying capacities for phosphorus and nitrogen
concentrations and light intensity to explain occurrence and dynamics of cya-
nobacterial blooms (Figure 4.3) and to support the development of manage-
ment approaches (Chapters 6 and 7).
If this model lake had extremely high concentrations of P and N, its
c arrying capacity for biomass would remain limited by light year-round:
phytoplankton biomass would increase to such high turbidity that cells
shade each to the point that no further increase is possible. In shallow
lakes, higher biomass concentrations are possible than in waterbodies with
4 Conditions determining occurrence 243
deeper mixing because deep mixing entrains cells into darker l ayers. Using
the concentration of chlorophyll-a as a measure of p hytoplankton biomass,
Figure 4.4 illustrates this with a selection of lakes: the deep lakes in the
lower panel scarcely touch the curve for the 1:1 relationship of chloro-
phyll-a to TP, whereas some of the shallow ones summer mean values even
occasionally exceed this curve. Moreover, at higher phosphorus concen-
trations, the curves for Lake Constance (Bodensee), Lake Tegeler See and
1 10 100 1,000 10,000
]L/gμ[
a
llyhporolhc
fo
naem
lanosaes
1000
shallow polymictic lakes
100
Balaton
10 Melangsee
Langer See
Veluwemeer
1 Neusiedler See
Petersdorfer See
Mälaren at Galten
0.1
small stratified lakes
100
10
Tegeler See
1 Schlachtensee
Scharmützelsee
Arrancio Reservoir
0.1
large stratified lakes
100
Vättern
Mondsee
10 Bodensee
Lac Leman
Lago Maggiore
1 Lake Washington
Wahnbach Reservoir
Mälaren (Ekoln basin)
0.1
seasonal mean of Total Phosphorus [μg/L]
Figure 4.4 Phytoplankton biomass (as chlorophyll-a) and total phosphorus (TP) seasonal
means (May – October or September) of epilimnion or surface layer in μg/L, con-
nected chronologically for each lake for consecutive years. The dotted line shows
the 1:1 relationship of chlorophyll-a with TP. See online version for colour code
of waterbodies. (Modified from Chorus et al., 2011. Electronic version in colour)
244 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Lake Schlachtensee level off asymptotically at 20–50 μg/L TP rather than
showing further increase. Balaton and Neusiedler See show lower means
for chlorophyll-a because of the strong impact that suspended sediment can
have in the large, wind-exposed shallow lakes: in these lakes, suspended
sediment particles shade the phytoplankton, which therefore cannot
develop as high a biomass per unit phosphorus as it can in other, smaller
and less wind-exposed lakes (Fastner et al., 2016). Downing et al. (2001)
show curves for 99 lakes that level off at 100 μg/L TP and 1000 μg/L TN.
For mostly shallow lakes in northern Germany, Dolman et al. (2012)
assume that nutrient limitation of the carrying capacity can fairly reliably
be excluded only at nutrient concentrations exceeding 300 μg/L of TP and
4000 μg/L of TN.
Moreover, because of losses (e.g., grazing, phage and parasite infection),
phytoplankton biomass rarely fully reaches the levels that carrying capac-
ity in terms of N, P and light would allow. This is manifestly observed
particularly during a seasonal clear-water phase in many lakes when loss
through zooplankton grazing exceeds phytoplankton growth to a degree
that results in a population collapse and a steep increase in water trans-
parency (Lampert et al., 1986). Cyanobacteria, however, tend to be more
resistant to grazing (see section 4.2.4) than many other phytoplankton taxa
and thus are more likely to attain the maximum possible biomass level
given by the carrying capacity.
N or P limitation and N:P ratios: The occurrence of cyanobacterial
blooms has often been linked to the relative availability of N in relation
to P, proposing cyanobacteria in general to become dominant when the
N:P ratio drops below 29 to 1, even for non N fixers like Microcystis
2
(discussed in Downing et al., 2001). Indeed, some published field and
experimental data show correlations between the dominance of cyanobac-
teria and low N:P ratios (Smith, 1983; Bulgakov & Levich, 1999; Elser &
Urabe, 1999; Harris et al., 2014). However, other studies do not confirm
this: for example, the analysis of 99 of the most studied lakes in the tem-
perate zone by Downing et al. (2001) showed N:P ratios to be the weakest
predictor of cyanobacterial dominance as compared to the concentration
of N or P individually. Also, in an extensive analysis of 210 Danish lakes,
Jensen et al. (1994) found no relationship between amounts of N-fixing
cyanobacteria and low ratios of total nitrogen (TN) to TP, nor did their
biomass correlate with low concentrations of inorganic N. What causes
these contradicting findings?
Reynolds (1999a) explains them by emphasising the importance of “abso-
lute quantities” rather than ratios for driving the outcome of competition
between species and emphasises that the N:P ratio becomes meaningless when
concentrations of either N or P or both are too high to be limiting phyto-
plankton growth (Reynolds, 1999b). Limitation is highly unlikely if concen-
trations of TP and TN support a high capacity for phytoplankton biomass
(see above in this section), and in many waterbodies, particularly in deep
4 Conditions determining occurrence 245
ones, thresholds for the limitation of biomass by TP and TN will be lower.
Moreover, if dissolved nutrients are present in concentrations above 5–10
μg/L P or 100 μg/L N, this indicates that these are not limiting the phyto-
plankton’s uptake rates, that is, that phytoplankton cells are saturated (note
that in practice for dissolved P, the limit of quantification for most analyti-
cal methods corresponds to the threshold for limitation, i.e., 10 μg/L; see
Chapter 13). Unfortunately, N:P ratios have been used widely and erro-
neously without excluding data from such clearly nonlimiting situations.
Whether P or N is limiting phytoplankton growth and at which time dur-
ing the season can be of relevance for water managers who need to prevent
further increase in cyanobacterial blooms or find the locally most effective
measures to reduce cyanobacterial abundance in a specific waterbody (see
section 7.1 and Box 4.5). However, even where N is the limiting resource at
times, sufficiently reducing P will turn P into the limiting resource and last-
ingly limit phytoplankton biomass.
4.3.3 L ight availability
Light is exponentially attenuated with increasing depth (following the
Lambert–Beer equation), and how steeply it diminishes over depth depends
on the water`s constituents. There may be complete darkness already at a
few metres depth (Kirk, 1994). The zone in which photosynthesis can occur
is termed the “euphotic zone” (Z ). By definition, the euphotic zone extends
eu
from the surface to the depth at which the light intensity amounts to 1%
of that at the surface. It is frequently estimated by measuring transparency
with a Secchi disc (see Chapter 13) and multiplying the Secchi depth read-
ing by a factor of 2.3–2.5.
Phytoplankton species – including cyanobacteria – differ in the depen-
dency of their growth rate on light. Light availability therefore is an impor-
tant factor determining the outcome of competition between species and
thus whether the phytoplankton biomass consists chiefly of certain microal-
gae or certain species of cyanobacteria. At low light intensity, some cyano-
bacterial species (e.g., Planktothrix agardhii and P. rubescens) can maintain
a higher growth rates than other phytoplankton organisms. This is why
P. rubescens can thrive in the metalimnion of thermally stratified lakes and
reservoirs. Also, in waters with high turbidity, P. agardhii can outcompete
other species, reaching very high biomass, which in turn decreases trans-
parency, thus improving growth conditions for itself in the sense of a posi-
tive feedback loop (Mantzouki et al., 2016).
Other cyanobacterial taxa need higher light intensities than Planktothrix
in order to develop substantial populations, for example, many taxa of
the order Nostocales. For R. raciborskii in lakes of northern Germany,
Wiedner et al. (2007) demonstrated that light intensity is the most impor-
tant factor determining population growth. Dolichospermum species are
246 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
also known to occur more frequently in fairly clear water, for example, early
in the growing season before turbidity increases due to increased phyto-
plankton density, or in less eutrophic lakes.
Using field data from Lake Victoria, Loiselle et al. (2007) show how the
availability of solar irradiation, strongly influenced by mixing depth, deter-
mines the carrying capacity in waterbodies with excessive nutrient concen-
trations and how maximum phytoplankton biomass levels can be estimated
from light availability.
4.3.4 T emperature, thermal stratification
and mixing
Temperature is a further strong determinant of species composition, act-
ing in two ways: (i) temperature in relation to the depth of a waterbody
determines whether it develops thermal stratification or whether the water
is mixed down to the sediment and (ii) all species grow faster at higher tem-
peratures, up to a limit, but species differ in the temperature dependency of
their growth rate, and for some cyanobacteria, the increase in growth rates
as a function of temperature is steeper than for most of their eukaryotic
competitors (Visser et al., 2016b).
In continental-scale surveys, cyanobacteria have been shown to dominate
at locations with higher temperatures (Kosten et al., 2009; Kosten et al.,
2012), and links between blooms and heatwaves (Jöhnk et al., 2008; Huber
et al., 2012) have been established, albeit not always in a straightforward
manner and partly only based on theoretical considerations (see below).
Field data on species occurrence in relation to temperature scarcely allow
a distinction between the indirect impact of temperature (i.e., determining
the extent of mixing vs. stratification) and its direct effect on growth rates,
and temperature alone is not a good predictor of blooms.
Often the indirect impacts of temperature are more important than the
direct effects (Carey et al., 2012). In temperate climates, many waterbod-
ies develop thermal stratification in spring, as energy input into the surface
layer increases with increasing solar insolation and temperature (Box 4.2).
Together with irradiation, wind and convection, thermal energy input
determines whether waterbodies are well mixed or develop thermal strati-
fication. As discussed above, thermal stratification is of paramount impor-
tance for growth and proliferation of all phytoplankton – cyanobacteria as
well as microalgae. The strength of stratification, for example, of a deep
alpine lake like Lake Zurich (Switzerland) has increased by more than 20%
over the last few decades (Livingstone, 2003), compared to a less than 1 °C
warming of the surface water of the lake over the same period, thus illus-
trating the relevance of indirect versus direct effects of climate warming.
Wagner & Adrian (2009) propose more stable stratification to promote
cyanobacterial blooms in eutrophic waterbodies.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 247
Thermal stratification determines
• to which depth an average phytoplankton cell is entrained in the mixed
upper layer and thus how much light it is exposed to while being moved
across the underwater light gradient;
• the temperature and nutrient gradients that cells and colonies experi-
ence while entrained in mixing;
• whether cyanobacterial surface blooms and scums can accumulate at
the surface of a waterbody or mixing energy is sufficient to maintain
cyanobacteria in suspension;
• whether phytoplankton cells are likely to sink to the bottom through
sedimentation (thus getting – at least temporarily – lost from the
growing population when light does not penetrate to the sediment), or
whether they remain entrained in the mixed layer;
• whether nutrients liberated from decaying biomass are redistributed
in the water or whether they accumulate near the sediment or in the
hypolimnion.
Huisman et al. (2004) modelled competition between buoyant cyanobac-
teria and other nonbuoyant phytoplankton as a function of access to light
and turbulent mixing, and showed that under weak turbulence buoyant
cyanobacteria on average may be positioned closer to the surface than their
competitors. Hence, access to light, in particular for bloom-forming cya-
nobacteria, must always be considered in relation to the mixing processes
in the lake. Under sustained, full mixing, Microcystis blooms are unlikely
to form, an observation strengthened by successful control of these species
through artificial lake mixing (Visser et al., 2016a).
Many cyanobacteria have higher temperature optima than many micro-
algae, in particular Microcystis spp. (Reynolds, 1997); thus, despite their
relatively slow growth at lower temperatures, Microcystis may catch up
with competitors in warmer water. Furthermore, elevated temperatures at
the sediment surface may promote the recruitment of cyanobacteria from
the sediments, as proposed for Microcystis (Shapiro, 1997) and R. racibor-
skii (Padisák, 1997; Wiedner et al., 2007). The filamentous cyanobacte-
rium R. raciborskii thrives in waters with high temperature and moderately
high nutrient levels, particularly in phases of elevated transparency, and
was originally considered to be a typical tropical and subtropical species
(Dyble et al., 2002). Although some discussions have assigned its spread to
temperate climate zones to global warming, an alternative explanation is
that the genotypes found on different continents (see above) may also differ
in their growth rates in relation to temperature (Gugger et al., 2005b). True
extremophiles can be found in hot spring microbial mat communities.
Elevated temperature also speeds up the degradation of organic matter,
releasing nutrients for growth.
248 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Most of the studies on cyanobacterial occurrence in relation to temperature
focus primarily on population growth while temperature-dependent losses
are studied to a lesser extent. Yet, losses may also correlate positively with
temperature and outbalance increased growth rates at higher tempera-
tures. For example, Rohrlack (2018) found that Planktothrix can prolif-
erate in a low temperature niche that minimises losses through microbial
antagonists to a degree that allows bloom formation despite relatively low
growth rates.
4.3.5 H ydrodynamics and waterbody morphometry
Waterbody size, depth, shape, wind exposure and water exchange rate are
critical conditions determining how water stratifies (layering of water due
to density differences caused by heating of surface water or salinity) or
moves and how it entrains plankton. In large, shallow lakes, turbulence is
often pronounced, particularly if they are exposed to wind, and even highly
buoyant cyanobacteria will have little chance for vertical positioning and
are mixed throughout the water column. These conditions favour species
like P. agardhii which do not show pronounced buoyancy regulation but
are good competitors for light. Deep lakes generally are thermally strati-
fied with turbulence restricted to the epilimnion. If these lakes are small
and wind-sheltered, turbulence may be minimal (with mixing only slight,
due to convection as the lake cools nocturnally). However, large stratified
lakes and reservoirs may develop internal seiches – with the metalimnion
oscillating at regular intervals in consequence of wind moving the surface
layer towards one end of the waterbody (Cuypers et al., 2011). This may
move species that form distinct layers at the metalimnion, particularly
Planktothrix rubescens, up and down in the regular rhythm of the seiches,
by up to several metres.
The shape of a waterbody (i.e., its morphometry) is an important factor
to consider, in particular for planning sites for drinking-water offtake or
bathing beaches, and respective monitoring (see Chapter 11). Lake mor-
phometry can be fairly regular, and thus, water quality (including plankton
composition) may be fairly homogeneous. Other waterbodies, particularly
reservoirs, have highly irregular, fractal shorelines with incised bays where
tributaries enter or with more or less separated basins in which water qual-
ity varies distinctly between individual sites. In such situations, cyanobacte-
rial blooms can develop or accumulate in one section, not in others.
A further important hydrological characteristic of a waterbody is the
water residence time, that is, the theoretical average time a volume of
water remains in the waterbody. It is calculated from the in- and outflow
discharge, and the lake volume. Water residence times may vary between
seasons and years depending on precipitation and other events in the
catchment – and for reservoirs also on the abstraction regime. Low water
4 Conditions determining occurrence 249
residence times – that is, in the range of days – may dilute cyanobacteria
faster than they can multiply. Also, depending on the variability of the qual-
ity of inflowing water, low residence times may alter other growth condi-
tions like nutrient concentrations, with short timescales (Romo et al., 2013).
Reynolds et al. (2012) show that diluting a lake by 10% per day would cause
an exponential loss rate of −0.16 per day, and most phytoplankton species
can scarcely reach faster net growth rates.
Both morphological and hydrological conditions also influence nutrient
concentrations (Carpenter et al., 1999). Long water residence times – that
is, in the range of years – may be an obstacle for reducing lake P concentra-
tions because even at substantial external load reduction, P can be recycled
within the waterbody and P concentrations in the sediment will decrease
only slowly. For example, Jeppesen et al. (1991) showed that among 27
shallow lakes under restoration in Denmark, cyanobacterial dominance
disappeared substantially faster in those with a water retention time of less
than half a year.
Stable thermal stratification in deeper lakes can prevent most of the phos-
phorus released from the sediment from reaching the euphotic zone dur-
ing the stratified period, whereas in shallow, turbulent lakes, sediment can
be resuspended and mixed throughout the water column on windy days,
severely reducing water transparency and reducing phytoplankton access
to light. For nitrogen, in contrast, mixing down to the sediment particu-
larly in shallow lakes and reservoirs can cause it to become limiting for
phytoplankton biomass because higher temperatures at the water–sediment
interface enhance the decay of organic substances and in consequence also
denitrification rates and hence loss of nitrogen (N ) to the atmosphere (see
2
section 4.3.2).
4.3.6 p H: acidity and alkalinity
Cyanobacterial blooms are often associated with alkaline conditions.
However, this is usually a consequence rather than a cause of these blooms:
the uptake of hydrogen carbonate through intense photosynthesis shifts the
equilibrium between carbonate and hydrogen carbonate to render the water
alkaline (Wetzel, 2001; Lampert & Sommer, 2007). While this can be due
to a high biomass of any phytoplankton with a high rate of photosynthesis,
it is typically cyanobacterial blooms that reach particularly high biomass
concentrations and thus are the cause of high pH. Vice versa, cyanobacte-
rial blooms may be expected in waterbodies with pH ranges above 7. Under
acidic conditions (pH <6), cyanobacteria are rarely found in sufficiently
high cell density to cause detectable levels of cyanotoxins (Chorus & Niesel,
2011). However, given the array of carbon uptake systems available to cya-
nobacteria, they can be found to dominate at both low and high dissolved
CO concentrations (Huisman et al., 2018).
2
250 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
4.4 C AN CYANOBACTERIAL BLOOMS
BE PREDICTED BY MODELS?
Two different types of approaches may serve to estimate the likelihood of
high cyanobacterial biomass from data on conditions in the waterbody:
functional approaches that strive to model the true interactions within the
ecosystem and statistical approaches that investigate correlations between
cyanobacterial biomass and waterbody conditions. While the advantage of
functional modelling is that it depicts causalities, in practice it is limited by
the complexity of ecosystem interactions which are challenging to depict in
any model. In contrast, while some of the statistical approaches tend to be
comparatively simple and straightforward, they only depict correlations,
not causalities. Taking correlation for causality is, however, widespread,
and when using regressions, it is important to keep in mind that if two fac-
tors correlate, it remains unknown whether this is because one is a cause
for the other or whether there is a third, perhaps unknown factor causing
both factors to increase or decrease in parallel. Correlations are indeed use-
ful to derive hypotheses on the factors determining cyanobacterial biomass;
however, before basing management decisions on their results, it is impor-
tant to investigate and understand the mechanism(s) likely to be causing the
correlation. Furthermore, statistical models capture the outcome of all pro-
cesses determining species dominance and biomass without disentangling
their relative importance. Thus, they can be useful for the waterbodies for
which they were derived or for those which are similar to the ones used in
the model (e.g., within the same ecoregion and similar hydrophysical char-
acteristics), but their predictions are uncertain when applying them to other
types of waterbodies.
Functional models strive to overcome this limitation and to be more gen-
erally valid by capturing key processes and relationships, including, for
example, the dependency of phytoplankton growth rates on environmen-
tal conditions, loss processes and competition between some keystone spe-
cies or phytoplankton groups. A range of such models has been developed
that include conditions favouring cyanobacteria. Mooij et al. (2010) give an
overview of models developed for the real-time prediction of cyanobacte-
rial scums and blooms from current or recent waterbody and meteorologi-
cal data, for example, CAEDYM, BLOOM and for shallow, nonstratifying
lakes PCLake, PROTECH and SALMO. However, these may fail if pro-
cesses other than those depicted in the model are important. Predicting
cyanobacterial dominance and biomass using generic functional models is
not only challenging because of the complexity of waterbody conditions
determining the outcome of competition between species, but also because
excessively complex models do not necessarily perform better. Reynolds &
Maberly (2002) propose a simple model to estimate the maximum possible
biomass yield (carrying capacity) in terms of concentrations of chlorophyll-
a from the concentrations of nitrogen and phosphorus as well as the photon
4 Conditions determining occurrence 251
flux density. While this neither includes loss processes nor a differentiation
between cyanobacteria and other phytoplankton, it is useful as approach to
estimating the maximum conceivable biomass to be expected (and if this is
high, rendering the water turbid, a high share of cyanobacteria is likely; see
section 4.3). Carvalho et al. (2013) emphasise the value of using nutrient
data – particularly those for total phosphorus (TP) – to estimate the likeli-
hood of cyanobacterial blooms because these are much more widely avail-
able than phytoplankton data.
Among the statistical approaches, a number of studies addressed the rela-
tionship between phytoplankton biomass (often quantified as chlorophyll-a)
and the concentration of TP, sometimes including total nitrogen (TN).
Most of these studies were conducted in temperate climates, and one of the
first to be widely used in management is Vollenweider (1976). Since then,
a number of studies have been published giving regressions from a vary-
ing number of waterbodies relating chlorophyll-a to both P and N (see an
overview in Yuan & Jones (2020). Phillips et al. (2008) give an overview of
15 earlier studies and show the slopes of a total of 15 regressions to vary
between 0.8 and 1.5 for log TP (16 lakes) and 1.0 to 1.4 for log TN (7
lakes); in consequence, the concentration of chlorophyll-α that these regres-
sions predict for 35 μg/L of TP (at 875 μg/L TN) varies by almost a factor
of 4, that is, between 5.4 and 19.5 μg/L. Moreover, these authors give new
regression equations that they developed from evaluating a data set from
>1000 European lakes. These show less scatter of the data for chlorophyll-a
versus TP as compared to chlorophyll-a versus TN, reflecting the limita-
tion of biomass chiefly by TP in the larger fraction of the lakes included in
the regressions.
In particular, Phillips et al. (2008) differentiated between lake types and
geographic regions within Europe. While results show no influence of region,
the most pronounced result is that the lowest biomass (in terms of chlorophyll-a)
per unit nutrient is found in deep lakes and the highest biomass in shallow
lakes (which were also those with high alkalinity). This is to be expected
because, as discussed above, deeper mixing causes more pronounced limita-
tion by light, particularly when a high density of phytoplankton cells causes
high turbidity. Also reflecting increasing light limitation at high phytoplank-
ton density, the correlation of chlorophyll-a with TP levelled off at concen-
trations of 100 μg/L TP and 1000 μg/L TN with yet higher levels of both
chlorophyll-a and nutrient concentrations, found only in very shallow water-
bodies. For using such a regression model to estimate target levels for nutri-
ents, Phillips et al. (2008) emphasise that “managers should use an equation
that is derived using data from a lake type that matches as closely as possible
the lake they are concerned with”.
For tropical climates, Huszar et al. (2006) evaluated data from 192
tropical lakes and found the relationship between chlorophyll-a and TP
concentrations to correlate less tightly than for the data from temperate
climates, and chlorophyll-a concentrations in relation to TP to be slightly
252 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Figure 4.5 (a): annual logarithmic means of chlorophyll versus total phosphorus (TP)
from 192 tropical and subtropical lakes from Africa, Asia and America with defini-
tions for “low P” being TN:TP by weight >17 and for “low N” <17. (b): comparison
of this relationship with regressions published for temperate lakes. (Reprinted with
permission from Springer Nature, in: Nitrogen Cycling in the Americas: Natural and
Anthropogenic Influences and Controls. Nutrient-chlorophyll relationships in tropical-
subtropical lakes: do temperate models fit? Huszar V, Caraco N, Roland F, Cole J.
Copyright 2006 Springer Nature. www.springernature.com/gp.)
lower (Figure 4.5). As explanation for these phenomena, Jeppesen et al.
(2005) propose a stronger impact of further factors such as light limita-
tion in waterbodies with elevated turbidity and more complex food web
interactions. In particular, loss processes may lead to phytoplankton
4 Conditions determining occurrence 253
biomass considerably lower than that expected from nutrient concentra-
tions. Mamun & An (2017) show the influence of seasonal Asian monsoon
on regressions of chlorophyll-a and TP with data from 182 agricultural
reservoirs and demonstrate a much stronger correlation of chlorophyll-a to
TP as compared to TN for these waterbodies.
For practical purposes of predicting biomass levels, it is important to
realise that the data points for the individual waterbodies behind these
regressions scatter considerably: in the statistical evaluation of Huszar
et al. (2006), log(TP) explains only 42% of the variance of log chloro-
phyll (and a multiple regression approach, including TN, resulted in only
moderate improvement to 47% explanatory power). In consequence of
this scatter, in any given waterbody observed annual mean chlorophyll
concentrations can be several-fold higher or lower than those predicted
from total phosphorus (TP)concentrations and the regressions shown in
Figure 4.5.
However, this uncertainty in the range of a factor of 3–5 relates to data
spanning three orders of magnitude, and thus, the published regressions
remain useful for two purposes: (i) for first estimates of the TP target
concentrations that are likely to control biomass and (ii) for investigating
causes for particularly high or low mean chlorophyll concentrations in rela-
tion to those of TP.
Predicting specifically cyanobacterial biomass requires an understanding
of the conditions in the waterbody which favour their dominance. Trophic
state and the concentrations of TP are key: where nutrient concentrations
enable high levels of total phytoplankton biomass, this has a high likelihood
to consist chiefly of cyanobacteria – in temperate climates particularly dur-
ing summer and early autumn: Downing et al. (2001) evaluated data from
99 lakes of the temperate zone and found that the risk of cyanobacterial
dominance was related to the TP concentration as follows: 0–30 μg/L TP:
0–10% risk of cyanobacterial dominance; 30–70 μg/L TP: ~40% risk; 100
μg/L TP: ~80% risk. The authors further highlight that turbidity – caused
by high phytoplankton cell density – increases the risk of cyanobacterial
dominance (at concentrations of chlorophyll-a above 10 μg/L, transparency
tends to decline to less than 1 m).
Data from shallow lakes in north-eastern Germany dominated by filamen-
tous cyanobacteria confirm the pattern described by Downing et al. (2001):
total phytoplankton biomass proved to be a good predictor of cyanobacte-
rial biomass, particularly at high total phytoplankton biomass (Figure 4.6).
Once biovolumes were higher than 13 mm³/L, cyanobacteria almost always
constituted at least half of this biomass, often more. The causal explana-
tion for this is that these lakes are dominated by filamentous cyanobacteria,
chiefly P. agardhii, which can outcompete other phytoplankton particularly
under the conditions of low light availability (see section 4.2.2). A similar
result is reported by Ptacnik et al. (2008) for lakes in northern Europe: at
chlorophyll-a concentrations above 10 μg/L, cyanobacteria often dominated
254 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
60
L
/³m Lan
m 50 Mel
n Pet
i
e Sch
m
40
u
lo
v
o
ib 30
a
ir
e
tc 20
a
b
o
n
a 10
y
c
0
%100
n
i
a
ir 75
e
tc
a
b
o 50
n
a
y
c
fo 25
e
r
a
h
s 0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
total phytoplankton biovolume in mm³/L
Figure 4.6 C yanobacterial biovolume in relation to total phytoplankton biovolume
for four lakes (Langer See [Lan], Melangsee [Mel], Petersdorfer See [Pet],
Scharmützelsee [Sch]) in the same catchment. Upper panel: absolute values
of biovolumes; lower panel: relative fraction of cyanobacteria in total biovol-
ume. (Data kindly provided by Brigitte Nixdorf, Brandenburgische Technische
Universität Cottbus.)
in samples taken in late summer, and as discussed above, Carvalho et al.
(2013) evaluated a data set from more than 800 lakes of medium or high
alkalinity in Europe and show a sharp increase in cyanobacterial biomass
relative to TP beginning at 10 μg/L, increasing sharply in the range of 20–100
μg/L and levelling off at 100 μg/L.
A further confirmation of the significantly enhanced likelihood of cyano-
bacteria to be the organisms causing high phytoplankton biomass is given
by Chorus et al. (2011) who evaluated a large database with almost 2000
samples from 210 lakes covering six European countries and three ecore-
gions (Central Plains, Central Highlands and Sicily) for the likelihood of
the six most common cyanobacterial taxa to occur, depending on envi-
ronmental conditions, that is, nutrient concentrations, seasonality, mixing
and waterbody depth, turbidity, pH and temperature (Table 4.2). For five
4 Conditions determining occurrence 255
30
20
10
0
30
20
10
0
<10 10- 25- 25- >90 <10 10- 25- 25- >90 <10 10- 25- 25- >90
25 50 90 25 50 90 25 50 90
categories of total phosphorus concentrations [μg/L]
]%[
selpmas
ni
ecnerrucco
fo
ycneuqerf
50
Microcystis Aphanizomenon Plank. aghardii
40
Limnothrix Dolichospermum Pseudanabaena
40
more than 0.5 mm³/L
up to 0.5 mm³/L
Figure 4.7 Frequency of occurrence of the six most common cyanobacterial taxa in 1928
samples from 210 waterbodies in two biomass categories (biovolumes up to
0.5 mm³/L and >0.5 mm³/L) and in five categories of total phosphorus (TP).
Number of samples per category from lowest to highest TP concentrations:
501, 623, 302, 246 and 256. (Modified from Chorus & Niesel, 2011.)
categories of TP concentrations, the frequency of individual taxa (relative to
all samples in the database) in samples is shown in Figure 4.7. While these
taxa were found in some of the samples even at low TP concentrations, that
is, <10 μg/L, with the exception of Aphanizomenon, this was only in less
than 10% of the samples, and some taxa (Microcystis spp. and Limnothrix
spp.) proved more likely to occur at higher TP concentrations. Importantly,
however, cyanobacterial biovolumes above 0.5 mm³/L occurred almost only
at TP concentrations above 25–50 μg/L TP and almost exclusively in water-
bodies classified as “eutrophic” or “hypertrophic” by the data providers.
These cyanobacteria also occurred significantly more frequently at >16 °C
in late summer, probably due to the time it takes for them to build up larger
populations as the season progresses.
Recknagel et al. (2017) demonstrate that lake-specific models developed
from historic data and cyanobacterial cell counts can – using only in situ
physical–chemical sensor monitoring data – predict blooms quite accu-
rately. Their models (based on hybrid evolutionary algorithms) for Lake
Wivenhoe in Australia and the Vaal Reservoir in South Africa forecast
blooms exceeding 1 μg/L total MCs 10–30 days ahead of their occurrence.
This demonstrates the value of multiseasonal time series to refine more gen-
eral models for a particular waterbody, as these can improve forecasts for
parameters of high relevance for water management.
256 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Table 4.2 Occurrence of cyanobacteria in relation to conditions determining their
growth in 201 European waterbodies
TP concentration
[μg/L] with Further conditions
Cyanobacterial occurrence of the Frequency ratioa at coinciding with elevated
taxon taxon significantly elevated biovolumeb frequency of occurrence
Max. ratio Min. ratio
More Less at TP at TP
frequent frequent >90 μg/L <10 g/L
Microcystis spp. > 50 < 25 3.8 0.2 Mixed, late summer,
>16 °C,
Secchi <3 m, pH >7
Aphanizomenon > 90 < 25 4.6 0 Mixed, late summer,
spp. >16 °C,
Secchi <2 m, pH >6
P. agardhii > 90 < 25 4.8 0 Late summer, >16 °C,
Secchi <2 m, pH >6–7
Limnothrix spp. > 50 < 25 4.0 0 Mixed, spring,
Secchi >3 m
Dolichospermum > 50 < 25 4.2 0.1 Mixed, late summer,
spp. >16 °C,
Secchi <3 m, pH >7–8
Source: Adapted from Chorus & Niesel (2011).
a “Frequency ratio” is the number of samples with the taxon to the total number of samples in the
database (see Figure 4.7 for details); note that these data apply only to this specific database.
b “Elevated biovolume” is defined in relation to cell size of the taxon and ranges from >0.1 to >1
mm³/L biovolume.
4.4.1 M odels to predict surface blooms and scums
As discussed in section 4.1.1, the mechanisms of cell accumulation differ
between the cyanobacterial genera that form surface blooms (particularly
Microcystis, Anabaena, Aphanizomenon) and those that form dense popu-
lations in the metalimnion, particularly Planktothrix rubescens, but some-
times also Aphanizomenon, Dolichospermum and Raphidiopsis. While
the horizontal drift of scums can be roughly inferred from prevalent wind
directions (Hutchinson & Webster, 1994; Welker et al., 2003), predicting
when cells will rise to the surface is more challenging. In many settings with
regularly recurring seasonal populations of surface bloom-forming cyano-
bacterial species, experience provides good indication of the time of year
and type of weather rendering scum formation to be likely.
Beyond experience valid for individual waterbodies, models to predict
scum formation from waterbody characteristics and weather forecasts can
be useful. These are being developed as vertical migration velocities and
buoyancy regulation mechanisms are increasingly becoming understood
for frequently occurring cyanobacterial species and genera. For Microcystis
4 Conditions determining occurrence 257
colonies, models describe the vertical migration of cyanobacteria (e.g.,
Kromkamp & Walsby, 1990; Visser et al., 1997; Wallace & Hamilton, 2000).
The fuzzy-logic-based early warning model developed by Ibelings et al.
(2003; see Box 4.8) includes weather forecast (wind speed and direction),
cyanobacterial biomass, buoyancy state of the cells and stratification sta-
bility to predict the timing and location of cyanobacterial scums several
days in advance, giving water managers time to act. A crucial problem with
all predictions of scum formation is the trade-off between false negatives
(missing blooms in the prediction) and false positives (predicting blooms
that then do not occur). Whereas the first may lead to public health risks,
the second may lead to economic damage for lake-based operations such as
restaurants, campsites and beaches when lakes are closed for recreational
purposes. For P. rubescens, Walsby (2005) developed a conceptual model
to explain the occurrence of surface blooms near shallow, leeward shores
arising from populations floating up in the metalimnion.
BOX 4.8: EARLY WARNING FOR THE
FORMATION OF MICROCYSTIS SCUMS
In the Netherlands, water managers use a scheme in which scums are clas-
sified as 1 (light scums/surface blooms) to 4 (severe scums) on the basis of
an information sheet showing pictures and descriptions of these categories.
For a number of Dutch lakes, observers took notes on the occurrence of
scums on a daily basis and used these data to validate an early warning model
(Ibelings et al., 2003) that predicts scum formation (time and location) from
several factors, including the mid-term weather forecast.
This model estimates cyanobacterial biomass increase using a traditional
water quality model, combining this with a fuzzy-logic model to estimate the
buoyancy of the cells and to relate this to waterbody mixing or stability of strat-
ification. Fuzzy-logic model allowed qualitative data (expert knowledge) about
scum formation to be made available in a quantitative way. The model was first
developed for the open water of the large Lake IJsselmeer and then expanded
to be applicable to smaller lakes, taking also sheltered areas (harbours, etc.)
into account, that is, places where scums are more persistent than in the open
water of lakes. It provides lake managers with a weekly bulletin in which the risk
of scum formation for the coming week is indicated. The model is continuously
being updated and improved (work by Deltares; https://www.deltares.nl).
All models are intended to (i) identify physical conditions of the waterbody
that allow for surface bloom formation in a specific lake and (ii) predict the
occurrence of surface blooms and scums. Generally, they work satisfactorily
258 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
for the waterbodies for which they were developed. For the application of
scum-forecasting models to a specific waterbody, it is important to consult
an expert for limnological modelling.
4.5 W ILL CLIMATE CHANGE AFFECT
CYANOBACTERIAL BLOOMS?
Evidence for an increase in cyanobacterial blooms in the wake of climate
change is increasingly published (e.g., Mooij et al., 2005; Paerl & Huisman,
2009), and there is widespread concern that cyanobacterial blooms will
increase in warming waterbodies where these are sufficiently eutrophic to
sustain blooms. However, the impact of climate change on growth condi-
tions for cyanobacteria is not straightforward (De Senerpont Domis et al.,
2013), and it is important not to confuse the effects of local – and possibly
unusual – weather on plankton dynamics in a given lake with climate effects.
Climate change affects water temperatures directly, but also indirectly
waterbodies through changes in the strength and duration of thermal strati-
fication (see section 4.3.4), including the impact of (possibly more frequent)
storm events, and warming can lead to earlier appearance of zooplankton,
changing grazing pressure on phytoplankton (Winder & Sommer, 2012).
Elevated atmospheric CO concentrations may stimulate access to CO for
2 2
surface blooms, which may be limited by inorganic carbon (see Huisman
et al., 2018) – but elevated water temperatures simultaneously reduce the
solubility of CO in water and thus lead to lower concentrations. Climate
2
change may also impact on the patterns of rainfall and snowmelt and thus
on inflow, turbidity and nutrient loading, and it may increase water resi-
dence times where periods of drought increase – or reduce water residence
time where precipitation increases. Thus, the probable effects of a climate
change include mechanisms that may be favourable for cyanobacterial
growth as well as mechanisms which are not, and the balance between
them will vary strongly between waterbodies and have different effects on
different bloom-forming species.
For Microcystis, a direct mechanism proposed to cause an increase in
its abundance is the more pronounced dependency of growth rates on
elevated temperature as compared to most of their competitors among
other phytoplankton, which would increase the chances of Microcystis
to dominate in warmer water. Additionally, increased stability of thermal
stratification resulting from enhanced energy input into the surface layer
of waterbodies could provide a competitive advantage for species with a
mode of active vertical positioning, like buoyant cyanobacteria. In con-
trast, however, increases in cloud cover and wind speed (as, e.g., predicted
for North West Europe) or more frequent storms would weaken thermal
stratification of waterbodies and thus reduce this competitive advantage.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 259
Analysis of surface blooms in IJsselmeer showed that scums are absent at
wind speeds greater than 2–3 m/s (Ibelings et al., 2003), and in this lake,
they may therefore become less frequent in the predicted slightly more
windy future (Cheng et al., 2002).
P. agardhii may also be affected by a warmer climate, especially in those
hypertrophic lakes where this species forms more or less permanent (year-
round) blooms. In Lake Veluwe, the Netherlands, a 15-year bloom of
Planktothrix was broken by a combination of reduced P loading and flush-
ing, but a series of cold winters with extended ice-cover was also impor-
tant in reducing the overwintering biomass of this species and giving other
species, particularly of planktonic algae, a chance to dominate in spring
(Reeders et al., 1998). Jeppesen et al. (2003) suggest that climate warming
may increase the probability of lakes to become locked in a turbid state.
Heatwave summers have been shown to reduce, rather than expand, the
proliferation of Planktothrix rubescens in deep lakes. Here, milder win-
ters rather than warm summers promoted cyanobacterial development, an
example of ecological memory carrying over environmental effects from
one season to the next (Anneville et al., 2015).
The spreading of R. raciborskii – previously regarded as subtropical – into
temperate regions has been tentatively linked to climate change. Wiedner et al.
(2007) showed that this is also not attributable to overall higher summer
temperatures but rather to the timing of higher temperatures: resting stages
(akinetes) of R. raciborskii germinate at 15 °C, and in northern Germany, lake
sediments reach this temperature earlier by 2 weeks, when less spring phyto-
plankton has developed and water is still clearer. The earlier R. raciborskii
hatches from its resting stages, the more light is available for its rapid growth
and the establishment of a large population.
A further aspect is that higher temperatures and higher stratification sta-
bility can trigger an increased release of phosphorus from sediments, thus
fertilising cyanobacterial blooms. Vice versa, however, increased stratifica-
tion stability can reduce the transport of released phosphorus into the eupho-
tic zone, thus reducing its availability to cyanobacteria possibly resulting in
a “climate warming-induced oligotrophication” (Salmaso et al., 2018). The
specific conditions in a waterbody determine which of these two contrary
processes determines phosphorus concentrations in the euphotic zone.
The concept of “carrying capacity” (section 4.3.5 and Figure 4.3) is helpful
for assessing the impact of climate change versus the impact of trophic state:
where there is not enough phosphorus and nitrogen to support substantial lev-
els of phytoplankton biomass, warming is not likely to increase cyanobacterial
proliferation. A number of modelling studies (reviewed by Elliott (2012))
show agreement that while cyanobacterial biomass is likely to increase in
a warmer climate, the magnitude of this response will strongly depend
on nutrient concentrations: where these are limiting, the annual amount
of biomass is not likely to increase although the timing and proportional
260 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
dominance of cyanobacteria may change. On the basis of data analysed
from more than 1000 lakes, Rigosi et al. (2014) emphasise that the impacts
of nutrients and climate are not synergistic; rather, “nutrients predomi-
nantly controlled cyanobacterial biovolume” and, although very eutrophic
lakes are more sensitive to increased temperature, “ultimately nutrients are
the more important predictor of cyanobacterial biovolume”. Others, how-
ever, are convinced that a synergy between eutrophication and increased
temperatures will produce even larger blooms in future (Moss et al., 2011;
Havens & Jeppesen, 2018).
A further concern in climate change scenarios for some situations is the
possible reduction in available water in lakes and reservoirs due to reduced
rainfall. Water scarcity combined with increasing cyanobacterial blooms
would create challenges for waterbody management in general and spe-
cifically for providing safe drinking-water. Yet, also for this aspect, direct
human impact, for example, through large-scale depletion of groundwater
for irrigation, could outweigh the possible long-term impact of changes in
precipitation patterns in the course of climate change.
In conclusion, it is highly probable that a significant change in climatic
conditions will affect the ecology of waterbodies. In some waterbodies, this
could cause an increase in the frequency and the scale of cyanobacterial
blooms, while not in others. Preparing today for possible effects of climate
change on cyanobacterial blooms in the future should not divert the focus
from measures to reduce cyanobacterial blooms that can be taken today:
reducing eutrophication to levels unlikely to support blooms is an effective
component of preparing for climate change.
4.6 W HICH FACTORS DETERMINE
CYANOTOXIN CONCENTRATIONS?
In natural waters, complete absence of cyanobacteria is unlikely given the
capability of cyanobacteria to thrive in the most extreme environments, and
therefore, cyanotoxins are likely found in most waterbodies – yet often at
very low concentrations and detectable only with highly sensitive analytical
methods. Therefore, the qualitative detection of cyanobacterial toxins, for
example, in samples concentrated with a plankton net, is only of limited
relevance for public health management.
For health risk assessment, not mere occurrence but rather the con-
centration of cyanotoxins in waterbodies is important, and the con-
centration is tightly linked to the biomass of potentially toxigenic
taxa. The most important ones include Microcystis, Planktothrix,
Dolichospermum, Raphidiopsis and Aphanizomenon in the plankton
of lakes and r eservoirs, benthic taxa like Phormidium or Microcoleus in
streams, ( tychoplanktonic) Tychonema in lakes, and Lyngbya or Nodularia
4 Conditions determining occurrence 261
in brackish and coastal waters. Other taxa that have been reported to
form blooms, such as Limnothrix or Gomphosphaeria, have not been
unambiguously reported to produce known toxins, while, on the other
hand, some toxigenic taxa such as Hapalosiphon or Umezakia have not
been reported to form blooms.
As discussed in Chapters 2 and 3, the current understanding of cyano-
toxin occurrence is incomplete, as the identification of further taxa produc-
ing specific cyanotoxins (and potentially yet unknown ones) is ongoing, and
for most types of cyanotoxins, new producing taxa may be found in future.
In particular, while it is well recognised that cyanobacterial populations
consist of a mixture of clones, some of which produce toxins and others
which do not, differentiation between toxic and nontoxic clones cannot
be done reliably by microscopic examination. It became possible only with
the advent of molecular methods (Kurmayer et al., 2004; section 13.4) or
highly sensitive analytical methods that allow the detection of toxins in sin-
gle colonies or filaments (Akçaalan et al., 2006; Welker & Erhard, 2007).
Such methodology can characterise the clonal diversity of cyanobacterial
communities, showing that a distinction between toxic and nontoxic clones
is only a very rough classification (Janse et al., 2004). Rather, a multitude of
genetically and metabolically distinct clones can be distinguished, with the
production of cyanotoxins being one characteristic among others (Fastner
et al., 2001a; Janse et al., 2003; Welker et al., 2004a).
Geographic variation in the genetic diversity of toxin-producing cya-
nobacteria is just beginning to be explored, and new insights into bio-
geographic patterns of toxin production are likely. Further surveys at a
global scale will be particularly relevant for regions that have so far been
poorly investigated.
4.6.1 C omposition of blooms and cyanotoxin types
MCs appear to be the most widespread type of cyanotoxins occurring in
health-relevant concentrations (Svirčev et al., 2019), and they are very likely
to occur when species of Microcystis or Planktothrix are present. Field
populations of these genera usually contain both clones with and without
the genes for MC production (see below), yet it is very rare to find field
populations of Microcystis without any MC-producing clones. In Europe,
field populations of Planktothrix agardhii as well as of P. rubescens have
never been observed without MC production (Kurmayer & Gumpenberger,
2006), although within these, some nonproducing clones occur frequently
(Welker et al., 2004b). A number of studies have highlighted patterns of
occurrence of particular MC congeners with particular taxa (e.g., Fastner
et al., 1999). While for Microcystis blooms MC-LR, MC-RR and MC-YR
typically are the most abundant congeners, in P. agardhii dominated
blooms demethylated [Asp3] congeners dominate and in P. rubescens the
262 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
[Asp3, Dhb7] congeners are typical. For risk assessment, specific toxico-
logical data for congeners other than MC-LR are sparse or lacking, so as
default or conservative estimate, these are regarded as being similarly toxic
as MC-LR (see sections 2.1, 5.1 and 5.2).
Occurrence of cylindrospermopsin was first only expected when R. raci-
borskii was present in the plankton, but the number of taxa reported to
produce CYNs is i ncreasing (currently including species of Aphanizomenon
and Dolichospermum). Further, among strains of R. raciborskii, only those
originating from Australia or South East Asia were found to produce CYNs
(Li et al., 2001b; Neilan et al., 2003; Piccini et al., 2011). Most CYN-
producing species known so far belong to the order Nostocales (sensu
Anagnostidis & Komárek (1985)) but evidence for CYN production in
Stigonematales and Oscillatoriales indicates that the ability to produce
CYN could be more widespread. However, CYN production appears to be
more variable than MC production: while for MCs, occurrence can be reli-
ably predicted when specific taxa are present with sufficiently high biomass
(Microcystis, Planktothrix), no taxa have been reported which are almost
always found together with CYNs. Thus, compared to MCs, for CYNs the
frequency of nonproducing clones appears to be relatively high. This obser-
vation could, however, be biased to some degree by the poorly resolved
taxonomy for some cyanobacteria (Chapter 3).
The same appears to apply to the cyanobacterial neurotoxins, although
less data are available on their occurrence and producing strains. For neu-
rotoxins, relationships between toxigenicity and taxonomy are less clear,
as information on genes encoding their biosynthesis has become available
later (see sections 2.3–2.5 and 13.4), but molecular methods are needed to
unambiguously verify the potential to produce neurotoxins in large numbers
of samples and strains (Wang et al., 2015). Like with MCs and CYNs,
the ability to produce neurotoxins is not confined to a particular order of
cyanobacteria, and within genera or even species, toxic and nontoxic clones
exist (Beltran & Neilan, 2000). There are also possible biogeographic differ-
ences in neurotoxin production: for example, while for Raphidiopsis exclu-
sively Brazilian strains seem to produce saxitoxins (Haande et al., 2008), for
D. circinale only Australian strains have been shown to produce saxitoxins
(Fergusson & Saint, 2000; Al-Tebrineh et al., 2010).
4.6.2 T oxin content in biomass
The term “concentration”, according to IUPAC definitions, refers to an
amount of toxin (generally expressed as mass or weight) per volume of water.
This is best distinguished from toxin “content” referring to an amount of
toxin per unit of cyanobacterial biomass, with the latter expressed as weight
or as biovolume (Box 4.9). This distinction is not always made clear in the
literature, rendering the comparison of data sometimes difficult.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 263
BOX 4.9: UNITS TO REPORT CYANOTOXINS
The occurrence of cyanobacterial toxins is reported in a variety of units that
are not always easily transformed from one to another. The most commonly
used units are given in this box together with exemplary values that can serve
as reference data to judge the plausibility of measured values.
Cell quota: amount of toxin per cell, expressed either in gravimetric or
in molar units; this is femtogram (fg) per cell or femto- or attomol (fmol
or amol, respectively) per cell. Cell quota are used primarily in laboratory
experiments on MC production but also sometimes in field studies and gen-
erally for unicellular taxa like Microcystis. In individual toxigenic Microcystis
strains, cell quota have been found to vary by a factor of about three, and
the maximum values reported are 165 fg/cell (Orr & Jones, 1998; Long et al.,
2001; Wiedner et al., 2003). From field samples, cell quota ranging from 1 to
144 fg/cell have been calculated (Okello et al., 2010). For CYNs, cell quota
of 60 fg/cell (Orr et al., 2010) and 191 fg/cell (Vasas et al., 2013) have been
reported for R. raciborskii and Chrysosporum ovalisporum, respectively. For
saxitoxin, cell quota of 1.3 picogram (pg) per cell in a Scytonema strain have
been reported together with a toxin content of 119 μg/g DW (Smith et al.,
2011). Cells of Scytonema have a volume about fifty times that of a Microcystis
cell. Any numbers considerably beyond these ranges may be the result of a
conversion error or inaccuracies in the quantification of the cell number or
the toxin concentration (see Box 4.10).
Toxin content: amount of toxin per mass of cells, expressed in μg or mg per
gram dry weight (dw) in the older literature. A large number of values have
been published for different cyanotoxins: in individual strains maximally 8 mg
MC/g DW and 4.6 mg CYN/g dw (Sivonen, 1990; Long et al., 2001) and in field
samples from below detection limit to a few mg/g dw. Toxin content may
also be expressed as μg per mm3 biovolume. As 1 mm3 equals ~1 mg of fresh
weight or about ~0.25 mg DW, and 1 μg toxin/mm3 corresponds to about
4 μg toxin/mg dw. A third common unit for toxin content is μg toxin per μg
chlorophyll-a, rarely exceeding a 1:1 ratio.
Toxin concentration: amount of toxin per volume of water, often expressed
in μg/L or if concentrations are very low, in ng/L (= 0.001 μg/L). Two frac-
tions need to be discriminated, particulate and dissolved. The particulate
fraction comprises toxins contained in cells and adsorbed to particles or,
from a practical point of view, the toxins that can be collected on a fil-
ter. Accordingly, the dissolved fraction is in the particle-free sample that
passed the filter. Toxin concentration is the most important parameter for
risk assessment.
264 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Dry weight: A wealth of (published) data exists on toxin contents of
bloom samples or isolated strains on a weight-to-weight basis (e.g., μg MC
per g dry weight). Analytical methods can detect most toxins in the ppb
range, that is, a few tens of nanograms per gram dry weight (for units
and scales, see Box 4.10). The highest reported toxin contents for cultured
strains are around 1.5% of dry weight for MCs and CYNs, corresponding
to 15 μg toxin per mg dry weight (Chapter 2). The maximally achievable
toxin contents of plankton net samples are thus reasonably expected in the
same range. It follows that any reported toxin content exceeding 2% of dry
weight is remarkably high and needs to be critically verified.
BOX 4.10: SCALES AND MAGNITUDES
OF MASS AND VOLUME
“For thousands more years, the mighty ships tore across the empty wastes of
space and finally dived screaming on the first planet they came across – which
happened to be the earth – where due to a terrible miscalculation of scale the
entire battle fleet was accidentally swallowed by a small dog”
Douglas Adams, The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy
What reads as funny side-kick in a novel conveys some deeper meaning: when
dealing with masses and volumes in extremely low ranges, anyone who is not
familiar with the units has to be very careful to avoid conversion errors that
could lead to the reporting of false numbers.
For units of mass (often also termed “weight”), the relevant units for cya-
notoxin research are gram (g), milligram (mg), microgram (μg), nanogram (ng),
picogram (pg) and femtogram (fg). The conversion factor from one unit to the
next is 1000; this means, for example, 1 μg equals 1,000,000,000 fg = 109 fg.
For units of volumes, in the context of toxic cyanobacteria, the units litre
(L), millilitre (mL), cubic millimetre (mm³; to report phytoplankton population
biovolume) and cubic micrometre (μm³; to report individual cells’ volumes)
are relevant. While conversion of L to mL to μL is done with respective fac-
tors of 1000, the conversion of mm³ to μm³ with a factor of 1 000 000 000
(109) requires particular attention. Conversion factors are summarised in the
following table:
volume dm³ cm³ mm³ μm³
dm³ = L 1 1.0E + 03 1.0E + 06 1.0E + 15
cm³ = mL 1.0E − 03 1 1.0E + 03 1.0E + 12
mm³ = μL 1.0E − 06 1.0E − 03 1 1.0E + 09
μm³ = fL 1.0E − 15 1.0E − 12 1.0E − 09 1
4 Conditions determining occurrence 265
Assuming a specific density of ρ = 1 g/mL for fresh cyanobacterial cells – the
density of water – biovolume converts to fresh weight (fw) as follows: 1 mm³
→ 1 mg and 1 μm³ → 1 pg. For the conversion of fw to dry weight (dw), a fac-
tor of 0.25 is considered. Based on this and the assumptions of an MC content
of 1% of dw, the amount of toxin per cell can be computed like in the following
table (with three exemplary size classes of Microcystis):
Dolichospermum Microcystis Microcystis Microcystis
Cell diameter 10 μm μm 4 4.5 μm μm 5
Cell volume 523 μm³ 34 μm³ 48 μm³ 65 μm³
(V == π/6 × d3)
Cell mass (wet 523 pg 34 pg 48 pg 65 pg
weight)
Cell dry weight 131 pg 8.5 pg 12 pg 16 pg
(25%)
Calculated cell 1300 fg/cell 85 fg/cell 120 fg/cell 160 fg/cell
quota
For Microcystis, the computed cell quota are in the range of reported cell
quota estimated from direct cell counts and MC analyses; hence, the estimates
are consistent with reported values. In turn, any cell quota substantially
exceeding these values have to be critically evaluated. For example, cell quota
reported for Microcystis of 1 pg/cell correspond to an improbable MC content
of some 10% of dw, 5 pg/cell to very unrealistic 50%, and any value exceed-
ing 10 pg/cell is close to the cells’ dry weight or actually exceeds it – which is
physically impossible.
It is thus highly advisable to perform basic plausibility tests based on
known cell dimension, biovolumes, cell numbers, etc. to verify that calcu-
lated ratios are physically possible and in accordance with available data. Any
value that is substantially beyond the values reported so far has to be care-
fully checked for possible errors in measurements and conversions – once
erroneous data have been published, they can develop a life of their own
through continuing citation.
Since most cyanobacterial blooms do not consist of a single clone with an
extremely high toxin content, but comprise mixtures of clones with varying
toxin contents, including nontoxigenic ones, field samples generally show
toxin contents that are much lower than 1% of dry weight. A number of
exemplary values for toxin contents of cultured strains are given in Chapter 2.
However, dry weight is not practical for estimating toxin concentrations
266 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
from biomass because it requires collecting a sufficiently large amount of
biomass from a defined volume of water with a plankton net for drying and
weighing. Water volumes are poorly defined if the sample is collected by
hauling the net through the water column. With more sensitive analytical
methods, small sample sizes suffice for accurate toxin analysis. The more
practical approach therefore is to relate toxin content to biovolume (see
Chapter 13 for the determination of biovolume by microscopy.)
Biovolumes: Data from field samples and laboratory experiments suggest
that, for example, for MCs, a ratio of 3 μg MC per mm³ biovolume is rarely
exceeded in the mixture of clones or genotypes occurring in waterbodies
(Fastner et al., 2001b; Hesse & Kohl, 2001; Znachor et al., 2006) even
though outliers of up to 13.8 μg/mm³ and 20.6 μg/mm³ have been found
in cultured strains of Microcystis and Planktothrix, respectively (see Table
2.3). This small number of higher ratios reported in the literature should
not be given too much weight unless the values have been verified with
further values in the same range. One reason for outliers may partly be
attributed to (unavoidable) inaccuracies in biovolume determination and
analytical errors when the concentrations are close to the limit of quanti-
fication: any computing of ratios is sensitive to relative errors and errors in
both values may potentiate the ratio’s error (Chapter 13). For example, an
underestimation of biovolume by setting the average cell diameter to 4 μm
while the true value is 4.5 μm results in a biovolume with an error of 30%.
Together with an overestimation of toxin concentration as 1 μg/L instead
of truly 0.7 μg/L (error of 30%) already results in an overestimation of the
toxin-to-biovolume ratio by a factor 2. Therefore, based on the bulk of the
reported data, a value of 3 μg/mm³ of biovolume serves as a conservative
assumption.
Cell quota: Not very many data are available on toxin contents per cell
(generally expressed in femtogram (fg) per cell). Exemplary values are com-
piled in Box 4.9 and for cultured strains in Chapter 2; these suggest, for
example, for MCs, a content of 200 fg per cell for Microcystis sp. is a
conservative assumption. Again, outliers have to be critically verified before
taken into consideration, for example, by rough estimates whether the cell
quota are consistent with toxin contents per dry weight reported for spe-
cific toxins and taxa (Box 4.10). Based on assumed cell quota of 200 fg
per cell of Microcystis, one million (106) cells in a bloom can account for
maximally 0.2 μg MC but expectedly, in typically multiclonal populations,
average cell quota are lower and hence the amount of toxin, too. Therefore,
for an in situ MC concentration of 1 μg/L, Microcystis cell densities of at
least 107 cells/L are expected. For other toxins and taxa, only few values
are available (Chapter 2), and unfortunately erroneous toxin contents (even
exceeding the cell’s dry weight) have been published. Box 4.10 gives factors
and an example for converting weights, biovolumes and cell quota to sup-
port checking for plausibility of values for toxin contents.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 267
4.6.3 T oxin concentrations in water
The dynamic fluctuations in cyanobacterial occurrence discussed above
impact on cyanotoxin concentrations. Studies of seasonal dynamics of cya-
notoxin concentrations in relation to trophic and geographic gradients have
mainly focused on MCs and cover a number of different types of water-
bodies. A number of publications report significant correlations between
MC concentrations and environmental variables – particularly total phos-
phorus (TP) (Kotak et al., 2000; Graham et al., 2006), N:P ratio (Kotak
et al., 2000; Welker et al., 2003), dissolved inorganic and total nitrogen
(TN) (Giani et al., 2005) or temperature (Albay et al., 2005). However,
all of these conditions typically directly affect cyanobacterial proliferation
and dominance (section 4.4), and the chief biological mechanism behind
these correlations is the wax and wane of cyanobacterial populations rather
than effects on toxin production by individual clones in these popula-
tions. Generally, the results show correlations of cyanotoxin concentration
to a measure of phytoplankton biomass such as chlorophyll-a or – more
s pecifically – biovolumes of potentially toxigenic cyanobacterial taxa
(Znachor et al., 2006; Sitoki et al., 2012; Salmaso et al., 2014). The data in
all of these studies show upper boundaries and below these a broad residual
scatter, indicating that further variables, other than biomass, also influ-
ence cyanotoxin concentrations.
A key explanation for highly variable ratios of cyanotoxin to cyanobac-
terial biomass (e.g., expressed as biovolume) is shifts in clonal composition,
that is, between clones of different toxin content (including nonproduc-
ers) which would influence the average cyanotoxin content of the cyano-
bacterial population and hence of the entire phytoplankton community
(Kardinaal et al., 2007; Welker et al., 2007; Yepremian et al., 2007; Agha
et al., 2014; Haruštiaková & Welker, 2017; Otten et al., 2017). Figure 4.8
illustrates this schematically: in (the improbable) scenario 1, all clones,
each of which with a different toxin content, show homogenous dynam-
ics and the relative clonal composition is stable. This would result in an
equally stable average toxin content and a toxin concentration tightly fol-
lowing the total cell number. In scenario 2, individual clones show diverg-
ing dynamics. As a consequence, the average toxin content varies strongly,
and the toxin concentration is partly uncoupled from the total cell num-
ber. In natural waters, dynamics of cyanobacterial populations are likely
closer to scenario 2 than to scenario 1, although the number of respective
studies is still limited. Coexisting toxigenic clones can also vary consider-
ably in their toxin composition (i.e., in individual congeners produced) and
in their (average) toxin content or toxin cell quota (Chapter 2 and Box 4.9)
that may span ranges exceeding two orders of magnitude (Wilson et al.,
2006b; Yepremian et al., 2007). The fact that cyanobacterial blooms and
populations are generally composed of mixtures of toxin-producing and
268 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
nonproducing clones has also been demonstrated for CYN and for neu-
rotoxins (Carmichael & Gorham, 1981; Fastner et al., 2001a; Wood &
Puddick, 2017).
In some waterbodies, Planktothrix- and Microcystis-dominated cyano-
bacterial communities show seasonal patterns with the MC content of
cyanobacterial biomass declining from a maximum at the onset of the
bloom to lower values later in the season, coinciding with shifts in relative
abundance of MC-producing clones (Kardinaal & Visser, 2005; Kardinaal
et al., 2007; Welker et al., 2007; Davis et al., 2009), while in other water-
bodies a reverse pattern was observed (see Chapter 5, Figure 5.1). In other
waterbodies, the proportion of toxigenic cells in relation to total cell num-
bers proved rather stable for extended periods of time (Kurmayer et al.,
2003; Salmaso et al., 2014). Also, MC concentrations may reach their
maximum even at times when toxin content per cell or unit biovolume is
relatively low if the total abundance of potentially toxigenic cyanobacte-
ria is high.
In contrast to the decisive role of cyanobacterial biomass and clonal
composition for toxin concentrations, laboratory studies showed that for a
given clone, ratios of toxin per cell rarely change by more than a factor of
2–4. Moreover, the striking differences between laboratory studies address-
ing the impact of environmental conditions on toxin production are likely
partially due to differences in study design (see Box 4.11). Compared to
shifts in cyanobacterial biomass and/or clone composition, such shifts in
toxin cell quota in individual clones have a relatively minor impact on toxin
contents of field populations (Chapter 2).
evitalummuc
emulovoib
sitsycorciM
time time
microcystin
cell quota
Microcystis
clones
microcystin
concentration
nitsycorcim
noitartnecnoc
scenario 1 scenario 2
Figure 4.8 Schematic illustration of dynamics of Microcystis spp. clones with varying
microcystin (MC) content (or cell quota) and the resulting MC concentration.
In (unlikely) scenario 1, the temporal dynamic of all clones is homogeneous:
that is, clone composition does not change over time, and the MC concentra-
tion follows Microcystis total biovolume. In scenario 2, the individual clones
show variable dynamics resulting partly in a decoupling of Microcystis biovol-
ume and MC concentration. For further explanations, see text.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 269
BOX 4.11: PITFALLS WHEN DETERMINING CELLULAR
CYANOTOXIN CONTENTS IN THE LABORATORY
Gary Jones
The literature is replete with laboratory studies attempting to correlate cellular
cyanotoxin content with growth-limiting resources such as nitrogen, phospho-
rus, iron, light or temperature. Some of their apparently contradictory results
may be due to inadequate experimental controls over the limiting resource
and of how it regulates cyanobacterial growth rate and yield, if unequivocal
single-resource limitation was not given. This is especially the case for batch
cultures, where in vitro conditions (e.g., pH, light, nutrient concentration) and
growth rate change continuously as the cells multiply (especially towards the
end of exponential phase). Some of these batch cultures problems can be over-
come through very carefully controlled design and sampling or, better still, by
using continuous culture systems. An important consideration, often not fully
accounted for, is that both batch and continuous culture experiments can be
designed (intentionally or unintentionally!) so that the limiting resource reduces
either one or both of (i) exponential growth rate and (ii) the cell concentra-
tion achieved in the plateau phase of a batch culture or the steady state of
a continuous culture. Also often overlooked is the need for culture media
which are chemically well defined, especially in the case of nutrients that have
complex aqueous chemistry and speciation like phosphorus or iron.
Planning of experiments and interpretation of data requires proper training
in microalgal culturing techniques, as well as a full understanding of the key
theories behind resource limitation and growth (most notably the Monod and
Droop equations), as well as the basic aqueous chemistry of common nutrient
ions. Indeed, many of these considerations apply equally to the interpretation
of field data as well.
Some excellent reference books to begin with are, for example, Stein et al.
(1980) and Andersen (2005) on culture techniques and theory and Stumm &
Morgan (1996) on water chemistry.
In conclusion, the average cyanotoxin concentration in a waterbody
depends on
1. the combined biomass of potentially toxic cyanobacteria;
2. the clonal composition of populations and, in particular, on clone-
specific toxin contents;
3. the physiological regulation of toxin biosynthesis in toxigenic clones.
270 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
While the clonal composition is crucial for the toxin concentration in the
water, a distinction between only two types – toxigenic and nontoxigenic – is
an undue simplification that may lead to invalid conclusions because both
types likely are represented by multiple individual clones (Meyer et al., 2017).
Other metabolites and physiological traits of individual clones may be deci-
sive for the outcome of selection between clones. However, the driving forces
regulating clonal composition of cyanobacterial populations are still poorly
understood. For example, N limitation may play a role in selecting clones
of Microcystis or Planktothrix that do not produce MCs (or other peptides)
(Gobler et al., 2016), or parasite and phage infection may cause clone-specific
mortality in cyanobacterial populations (Honjo et al., 2006; Rohrlack et al.,
2013; Van Wichelen et al., 2016; Stough et al., 2017; Box 4.3).
Therefore, accurate predictions of cyanotoxin concentrations from cya-
nobacterial biomass are limited, even in an intensively studied waterbody.
As an approximative approach, upper boundaries of possible toxin concen-
trations, based on conservative assumptions for toxin-to-biomass ratios,
are used in the Alert Levels Frameworks in sections 5.1 and 5.2. As dis-
cussed in section 4.5, modelling is still struggling to predict cyanobacte-
rial abundance as such, and forecasting cyanotoxin concentration adds
a further dimension of complexity. However, some examples show that
statistical models based on empirical data can predict cyanotoxin concen-
trations for a given waterbody with reasonable accuracy with respect to
their timing as well as the magnitude of toxin occurrence (Jacoby et al.,
2015; Recknagel et al., 2017). Although models cannot replace monitor-
ing for the purpose of assessing cyanotoxin risks to human health, they
can be used to streamline and focus monitoring, for example, by adjust-
ing sampling frequency to expected bloom and toxin dynamics (Chapter
11). By using a default assumption for a ratio of toxin to cyanobacterial
biomass, models to estimate cyanobacterial biomass can be expanded for a
first, conservative estimate of toxin concentration. Such an approach likely
results in an overestimation of the actual toxin concentration (Chapter 5
and section 4.6.5).
4.6.4 S patial heterogeneity of toxin concentrations
As cyanobacterial biomass can show pronounced spatial variability, so do
cyanotoxins: detectable cyanotoxin concentrations, reported as average con-
centrations from depth-integrated samples, generally range from just above
detection limit to a few tens of μg/L. However, in individual samples taken
in the same waterbodies on the same date, the toxin concentration can vary
by several orders of magnitude, depending on where and how the sample is
taken: surface layer versus hypolimnion or a central site versus the shoreline
(see Figure 4.1, Figure 4.2, Box 4.8). In scums of Microcystis, for example,
4 Conditions determining occurrence 271
concentrations of MCs can reach several tens of mg/L (see section 2.1). In
several multilake surveys, MC concentrations exceeding 50 μg/L were only
found in scums where concentrations regularly reached the mg/L range, but
not in integrated, averaged samples when cyanobacterial populations are
suspended more or less homogeneously in the water column (Cook et al.,
2004; Loftin et al., 2016). As concentrations of cyanotoxins can show pro-
nounced horizontal gradients, data from a water sample taken at one site are
unlikely to represent a lake-wide average (Welker et al., 2003; Ozawa et al.,
2005; Dyble et al., 2008). It is thus of utmost importance to clearly define
the objective and corresponding sampling strategy when designing monitor-
ing programmes (Chapter 11).
Horizontal variability is mainly caused by two factors. One is differences
in growth conditions that may occur between different parts of a lake, partic-
ularly in large lakes or reservoirs with complex morphology (e.g., Michalak
et al., 2013; Chung et al., 2014). The other – often more important one – is
the combination of surface bloom formation and horizontal dislocation by
which cyanobacterial cells are generally concentrated at nearshore, down-
wind sites of a waterbody (section 4.5). However, the short-term fluctuations
are not restricted to near-shore sites. Cyanotoxin concentrations in samples
taken at high frequency at a fixed station showed fluctuations of several μg/L
over the 6-h sampling interval (Miller et al., 2019).
Vertical variability in toxin concentration occurs mainly due to buoy-
ancy regulation of the toxic cyanobacteria (section 4.2). Higher concentra-
tions of cyanotoxins occur either in the topmost water layers, especially
when buoyant taxa like Microcystis are dominant (Naselli-Flores et al.,
2007), or in a metalimnetic layer in the case of Planktothrix rubescens
(Ernst et al., 2009).
Since vertical and horizontal distributions depend to a large degree on
current weather conditions such as wind direction and speed, dense cya-
nobacterial accumulations can occur within hours at one site of a lake and
a few hours later at others. For approaches to early warning for surface
bloom and scum occurrence, it is therefore effective to include the use of
satellite images or continuous measurement of fluorescence, combined with
numerical modelling (Ibelings et al., 2003; Chapter 11).
Two consequences are equally important for assessing the risk of cyano-
toxin occurrence:
1. A cyanotoxin concentration of a few microgram per litre (that might be
considered a low risk) at a central site in a waterbody can lead to cyano-
toxin concentrations several orders of magnitude higher at downwind
“hot spot” sites.
2. The timescales in which toxin concentrations can dramatically change
at a particular (near-shore) site can be only a few hours.
272 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
4.6.5 E stimating cyanotoxin concentration
from other limnological parameters
Where toxin data are not (or not readily) available for assessing and man-
aging the health risks caused by cyanobacteria, measurements of cyano-
bacterial biomass are a useful point of departure for conservative estimates
of potential maximum cyanotoxin concentrations in a waterbody. For
practical purposes, such as the Alert Level Frameworks in sections 5.1 and
5.2, estimates therefore best use the maximum expectable concentrations.
These will show where toxin analyses for the specific site are important
in order to obtain more precise information to appropriately guide man-
agement responses, with significantly lower toxin concentrations being
a likely outcome.
The limnological parameters allowing an estimation of cyanotoxin concen-
trations are primarily (cyanobacterial) biovolumes, cell counts, chlorophyll-a
concentrations, water transparency (i.e., Secchi depth) and nutrient concen-
trations, in particular total phosphorus (TP). The uncertainty of cyanotoxin
estimates increases in the same order. It is important to understand that
estimates of maximum cyanotoxin concentrations based on these para-
meters will not be accurate; they merely serve as indicators to support deci-
sions on where to focus efforts for monitoring and for further analyses, for
example, of cyanotoxins (Chapters 13 and 14). In particular, it is impor-
tant to realise that these indicators give conservative estimates gleaned
from maximum likely ratios of toxin to the respective indicator. Due to
their variability over time and between waterbodies, using any of them as
an estimate for cyanotoxin concentration implies that follow-up by toxin
analysis is most likely to result in a considerably lower rather than a higher
human health risk.
While the ratios of toxin to indicator proposed here are primarily derived
from data published for MCs, for other cyanotoxins, content per unit biomass
does not appear higher than these maxima known for MCs (see Chapter 2);
thus, the ratios of toxin to the concentration of the indicators discussed here
may also be assumed as proxy for risk assessment. However – in contrast to
MCs which largely occur cell-bound – applying this to CYNs may miss the
higher dissolved fraction of this toxin.
Biovolumes can give a fairly accurate estimate of the maximum expect-
able cell-bound cyanotoxin concentrations, but yet bear uncertainty span-
ning more than an order of magnitude due to the variability of the toxin
content of different clones of potentially toxigenic taxa, even within an
individual waterbody and a single season. A key advantage of using biovol-
umes identified by microscopy as point of departure for risk assessment is
that they include information on taxonomic composition, which provides a
basis for understanding the potential further development of a bloom and
thus of toxin occurrence. As discussed above in section 4.6.2, a ratio of 3 μg
4 Conditions determining occurrence 273
toxin per mm³ biovolume serves as conservative estimate that is not likely to
be exceeded in field samples.
Cell counts of potentially toxigenic cyanobacteria may likewise be used
in combination with reported toxin cell quota of these taxa to estimate
toxin concentrations. However, since reliable values for taxon and toxin-
specific cell quota are scarce, this approach is limited to taxa for which cell
quota estimates are available (see section 4.6.2). Furthermore, estimates
based on cell counts and toxin cell quota are subject to the same limitations
as estimates from biovolume.
Chlorophyll-a concentrations as a measure of biomass also include phy-
toplankton organisms other than cyanobacteria. Using them as indicator
therefore requires a brief qualitative assessment by microscopy of whether or
not the phytoplankton consists chiefly of cyanobacteria. While fluorescence
methods, which include the cyanobacteria-specific pigment p hycocyanin,
can overcome this, they introduce a further dimension of variability (see
section 13.5). Furthermore, the chlorophyll-a content of phytoplankton
may vary in response to light and nutrient availability by a factor of up to
10 (Kruskopf & Flynn, 2006; Kasprzak et al., 2008). Also, if photometric
analysis of chlorophyll-a includes a correction for phaeophytin, this may
result in an underestimation of the concentration of chlorophyll-a, particu-
larly in the low concentration range (Chapter 13.5), and thus in an overes-
timation of the toxin-to-chlorophyll-a ratio.
A number of reports on cyanotoxin concentrations (mainly MCs) suggest
that the cell-bound toxin concentration (in μg/L) only very rarely exceeds
the concentration of chlorophyll-a (also in μg/L) and if so, not by more than
a factor of three (e.g., Fastner et al., 2001b; Carrasco et al., 2006; Sinang
et al., 2013; Loftin et al., 2016; Mantzouki et al., 2018). For example, in
Figure 4.9, the MC/chl-a ratio exceeded 1 only in a small share of samples,
while the ratio for the majority of samples ranges between 0.1 and 0.5. An
assumption of a maximum ratio of 1 μg MC per μg chl-a is hence a conser-
vative approach, and in most cases, measured MC concentrations will be
considerably lower than thus estimated.
Secchi depth is a parameter for water transparency which is easily mea-
sured on site. In many waterbodies, it correlates directly and inversely with
phytoplankton abundance and chlorophyll-a concentration. However,
respective correlations generally show considerable scatter because other
water constituents (inorganic sediments suspended in the water, humic sub-
stances) and differences in optical properties of phytoplankton species affect
water transparency. Nonetheless, waterbodies with consistently high Secchi
depths are rarely dominated by cyanobacteria, and thus, high transpar-
ency indicates that potentially health-relevant cyanotoxin concentrations
are unlikely. The transparency threshold value indicating cyanobacterial
blooms is best established individually for a given waterbody or a region
with a number of similar waterbodies, based on seasonal data for Secchi
274 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
notses
rep
CM
a-lhc
rep
CM
]WD
g/gμ[
]gμ/gμ[
6000
(a)
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
n 51 39 32 4 37
4
(b)
3
2
1
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
n 48 34 20 13
4
(c)
3
2
1
0
emulovoib
rep
CM
]³mm/gμ[
Microcystis Pl. Pl. Anabaena mixed
spp. agardhii rubescens spp. genera
n 109 22 26
number of samples
Figure 4.9 Distribution of microcystin (MCs) ratios in samples from German lakes: MC
per dry weight of seston (a), MC per chlorophyll-a (b) and MC per biovol-
ume (c). The samples are classified by types of dominance: that is, more than
50% of biovolume in a sample was due to a particular taxon. (Adapted by
permission from Springer Nature, in: Cyanotoxins: occurrence, causes, con-
sequences. Cyanotoxin occurrence in Germany: Microcystins and hepatocyte
toxicity. Fastner J, Wirsing B, Wiedner C, Heinze R, Neumann U, Chorus I
(2001b). Copyright 2001 Springer Nature. www.springernature.com/gp.)
4 Conditions determining occurrence 275
depths and cyanobacterial biovolumes (or chlorophyll-a together with a
semiquantitative check via microscopy as to whether cyanobacteria domi-
nate). For small lakes of less than 50–100 ha, it may well be in the range of
2–3 m, while for larger waterbodies (due to the possibility of surface bloom
recruitment from a large water volume; Figure 4.2), it may be higher, and
scums may yet accumulate in a bay, while the Secchi disc reading taken at
a central site may show several metres. Furthermore, Secchi disc readings
cannot serve for assessing risks from benthic or tychoplanktonic cyanobac-
teria. Also, high Secchi depth readings will not indicate a cyanotoxin risk
from Planktothrix rubescens in the metalimnion: these will not diminish
transparency in the epilimnion (and may yet cause elevated toxin concen-
trations at drinking-water offtake depths).
In summary, while Secchi depth readings may be a very useful indicator
of cyanotoxin risks, as for many other parameters their reliability depends
on a sound understanding of the given waterbody.
Nutrient concentrations – primarily TP and total nitrogen (TN) – determine
carrying capacity and hence the maximally achievable phytoplankton bio-
mass (measured as biovolumes or chlorophyll-a concentrations) and hence
the maximally achievable (average) cyanotoxin concentration (Dolman
et al., 2012). Nutrient concentrations are useful as longer-term predic-
tors whether blooms of cyanobacteria – and hence cyanotoxin concentra-
tions at critical levels – are to be expected (Beaver et al., 2014; section 4.4
and Chapter 8).
REFERENCES
Abell JM, Özkundakci D, Hamilton DP (2010). Nitrogen and phosphorus limitation
of phytoplankton growth in New Zealand lakes: implications for eutrophica-
tion control. Ecosystems. 13:966–977.
Agha R, Gross A, Gerphagnon M, Rohrlack T, Wolinska J (2018). Fitness and
eco-physiological response of a chytrid fungal parasite infecting plank-
tonic cya nobacteria to thermal and host genotype variation. Parasitology
145:1279–1286.
Agha R, Lezcano MA, del Mar Labrador M, Cirés S, Quesada A (2014). Seasonal
dynamics and sedimentation patterns of Microcystis oligopeptide-based chemo-
types reveal subpopulations with different ecological traits. Limnol Oceanogr
59:861–871.
Akçaalan R, Young FM, Metcalf JS, Morrison LF, Albay M, Codd GA (2006).
Microcystin analysis in single filaments of Planktothrix spp. in laboratory cul-
tures and environmental samples. Water Res. 40:1583–1590.
Al-Tebrineh J, Mihali TK, Pomati F, Neilan BA (2010). Detection of saxitoxin-
producing cyanobacteria and Anabaena circinalis in environmental water
blooms by quantitative PCR. Appl Environ Microbiol. 76:7836–7842.
Albay M, Matthiensen A, Codd GA (2005). Occurrence of toxic blue-green algae in
the Kucukcekmece Lagoon (Istanbul, Turkey). Environ Toxicol. 20:277–284.
276 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Anagnostidis K, Komárek J (1985). Modern approach to the classification
system of Cyanophytes. 1-Introduction. Arch Hydrobiol Algol Stud.
38–39:291–302.
Andersen RA (2005). Algal culturing techniques. Amsterdam. Elsevier Academic
Press:578 pp.
Anderson L, Sarmiento J (1994). Redfield ratios of remineralization determined by
nutrient data analysis. Global Biogeochem Cy. 8:65–80.
Anneville O, Domaizon I, Kerimoglu O, Rimet F, Jacquet S (2015). Blue-green algae
in a “Greenhouse Century”? New insights from field data on climate change
impacts on cyanobacteria abundance. Ecosystems. 18:441–458.
Antunes JT, Leão PN, Vasconcelos VM (2015). Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii:
review of the distribution, phylogeography, and ecophysiology of a global inva-
sive species. Front Microbiol. 6:473.
Baker P, Humpage A (1994). Toxicity associated with commonly occurring cyanobac-
teria in surface waters of the Murray-Darling Basin, Australia. Mar Freshwater
Res. 45:773–786.
Baker SM, Levinton JS, Kurdziel JP, Shumway SE (1998). Selective feeding and bio-
deposition by zebra mussels and their relation to changes in phytoplankton
composition and seston load. J Shellfish Res. 17:1207–1213.
Barco M, Flores C, Rivera J, Caixach J (2004). Determination of microcystin variants
and related peptides present in a water bloom of Planktothrix (Oscillatoria)
rubescens in a Spanish drinking water reservoir by LC/ESI-MS. Toxicon.
44:881–886.
Barker GL, Konopka A, Handley BA, Hayes PK (2000). Genetic variation in
Aphanizomenon (cyanobacteria) colonies from the Baltic Sea and North America.
J Phycol. 36:947–950.
Beattie KA, Kaya K, Codd GA (2000). The cyanobacterium Nodularia in PCC 7804,
of freshwater origin, produces [L-Har(2)]nodularin. Phytochemistry. 54:57–61.
Beaver JR, Manis EE, Loftin KA, Graham JL, Pollard AI, Mitchell RM (2014). Land
use patterns, ecoregion, and microcystin relationships in US lakes and reser-
voirs: a preliminary evaluation. Harmful Algae. 36:57–62.
Begon M, Harper JL, Townsend CR (1996). Ecology: individuals, populations and
communities, fourth edition. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Beltran EC, Neilan BA (2000). Geographical segregation of the neurotoxin-
producing cyanobacterium Anabaena circinalis. Appl Environ Microbiol.
66:4468–4474.
Bianchi TS, Engelhaupt E, Westman P, Andren T, Rolff C, Elmgren R (2000).
Cyanobacterial blooms in the Baltic Sea: Natural or human‐induced? Limnol
Oceanogr. 45:716–726.
Bolch CJS, Orr PT, Jones GJ, Blackburn SI (1999). Genetic, morphological, and toxico-
logical variation among globally distributed strains of Nodularia (Cyanobacteria).
J Phycol. 35:339–355.
Boström B, Pettersson A-K, Ahlgren I (1989). Seasonal dynamics of a cyanobacteria-
dominated microbial community in surface sediments of a shallow, eutrophic
lake. Aquat Sci. 51:153–178.
Bouma-Gregson K, Olm MR, Probst AJ, Anantharaman K, Power ME, Banfield JF
(2019). Impacts of microbial assemblage and environmental conditions on the
distribution of anatoxin-a producing cyanobacteria within a river network.
ISME J. 13: 1618–1634.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 277
Briand JF, Leboulanger C, Humbert JF, Bernard C, Dufour P (2004). Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii (Cyanobacteria) invasion at mid-latitudes: Selection, wide physi-
ological tolerance, or global warming? J Phycol. 40:231–238.
Bright DI, Walsby AE (2000). The daily integral of growth by Planktothrix rubescens
calculated from growth rate in culture and irradiance in Lake Zürich. New
Phytol. 146:301–316.
Bulgakov N, Levich A (1999). The nitrogen: phosphorus ratio as a factor regulat-
ing phytoplankton community structure: nutrient ratios. Arch Hydrobiol.
146:3–22.
Burian A, Kainz MJ, Schagerl M, Yasindi A (2014). Species‐specific separation of lake
plankton reveals divergent food assimilation patterns in rotifers. Freshwat Biol.
59:1257–1265.
Cadel-Six S, Peyraud-Thomas C, Brient L, de Marsac NT, Rippka R, Méjean A (2007).
Different genotypes of anatoxin-producing cyanobacteria coexist in the Tarn
River, France. Appl Environ Microbiol. 73:7605–7614.
Cantoral Uriza E, Asencio A, Aboal M (2017). Are we underestimating benthic cya-
notoxins? extensive sampling results from Spain. Toxins. 9:385.
Capone DG, Burns JA, Montoya JP, Subramaniam A, Mahaffey C, Gunderson T
et al. (2005). Nitrogen fixation by Trichodesmium spp.: an important source
of new nitrogen to the tropical and subtropical North Atlantic Ocean. Global
Biogeochem Cy. 19.1–17.
Carey CC, Ibelings BW, Hoffmann EP, Hamilton DP, Brookes JD (2012). Eco-
physiological adaptations that favour freshwater cyanobacteria in a changing
climate. Water Res. 46:1394–1407.
Carlson RE (1977). A trophic state index for lakes. Limnol Oceanogr. 22:361–369.
Carmichael WW, Eschedor JT, Patterson GML, Moore RE (1988). Toxicity and
partial structure of a hepatotoxic peptide produced by the cyanobacterium
Nodularia spumigena Mertens emend. L575 from New Zealand. Appl Environ
Microbiol. 54:2257–2263.
Carmichael WW, Gorham PR (1981). The mosaic nature of toxic blooms of cyano-
bacteria. In: Carmichael WW, editors: The water environment: algal toxins and
health. New York: Plenum Press:161–172.
Carpenter SR, Ludwig D, Brock WA (1999). Management of eutrophication for lakes
subject to potentially irreversible change. Ecol Appl. 9:751–771.
Carrasco D, Moreno E, Sanchis D, Wörmer L, Paniagua T, Del Cueto A et al. (2006).
Cyanobacterial abundance and microcystin occurrence in Mediterranean water
reservoirs in Central Spain: microcystins in the Madrid area. Europ J Phycol.
41:281–291.
Carvalho L, McDonald C, de Hoyos C, Mischke U, Phillips G, Borics G et al. (2013).
Sustaining recreational quality of European lakes: minimizing the health risks
from algal blooms through phosphorus control. J Appl Ecol. 50:315–323.
Chapman EJ, Byron CJ (2018). The flexible application of carrying capacity in ecol-
ogy. Global Ecol Conserv. 13:e00365.
Cheng Y, Canuto V, Howard A (2002). An improved model for the turbulent PBL.
J Atmos Sci. 59:1550–1565.
Chonudomkul D, Yongmanitchai W, Theeragool G, Kawachi M, Kasai F, Kaya K
et al. (2004). Morphology, genetic diversity, temperature tolerance and toxic-
ity of Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Nostocales, Cyanobacteria) strains from
Thailand and Japan. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 48:345–355.
278 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Chorus I, Dokulil M, Lammens E, Manca M, Naselli-Flores L, Nixdorf B et al (2011).
Restoration responses of 19 lakes: are TP thresholds common? In: Chorus I,
Schauser I, editors. Oligotrophication of Lake Tegel and Schlachtensee, Berlin
Analysis of system components, causalities and response thresholds compared
to responses of other waterbodies. Dessau: Umweltbundesamt:84–102.
Chorus I, Niesel V (2011). Steps towards a statistical model to predict phytoplank-
ton responses to changes in trophic state. In: Chorus I, Schauser I, editors.
Oligotrophication of Lake Tegel and Schlachtensee, Berlin Analysis of system
components, causalities and response thresholds compared to responses of other
waterbodies. Dessau: Umweltbundesamt:109–139.
Chorus I, Spijkerman E (2020). What Colin Reynolds could tell us about nutrient
limitation, N:P ratios and eutrophication control. Hydrobiologia, in press
Chung S, Imberger J, Hipsey M, Lee H (2014). The influence of physical and physi-
ological processes on the spatial heterogeneity of a Microcystis bloom in a
stratified reservoir. Ecol Model. 289:133–149.
Cirés S, Wörmer L, Agha R, Quesada A (2013). Overwintering populations of
Anabaena, Aphanizomenon and Microcystis as potential inocula for summer
blooms. J Plankton Res. 35:1254–1266.
Conley DJ, Paerl HW, Howarth RW, Boesch DF, Seitzinger SP, Karl E et al. (2009).
Controlling eutrophication: nitrogen and phosphorus. Science. 123:1014–1015.
Cook CM, Vardaka E, Lanaras T (2004). Toxic cyanobacteria in Greek freshwaters,
1987–2000: Occurrence, toxicity, and impacts in the Mediterranean region.
Acta Hydrochim Hydrobiol. 32:107–124.
Cuypers Y, Vincon-Leite B, Groleau A, Tassin B, Humbert JF (2011). Impact of inter-
nal waves on the spatial distribution of Planktothrix rubescens (cyanobacteria)
in an alpine lake. ISME J. 5:580–589.
Davis TW, Berry DL, Boyer GL, Gobler CJ (2009). The effects of temperature
and nutrients on the growth and dynamics of toxic and non-toxic strains of
Microcystis during cyanobacteria blooms. Harmful Algae. 8:715–725.
De Senerpont Domis LN, Elser JJ, Gsell AS, Huszar VL, Ibelings BW, Jeppesen E et al.
(2013). Plankton dynamics under different climatic conditions in space and time.
Freshwater Biol. 58:463–482.
Diaz M, Pedrozo F, Reynolds C, Temporetti P (2007). Chemical composition
and the nitrogen-regulated trophic state of Patagonian lakes. Limnologica.
37:17–27.
Dionisio Pires LM, Bontes BM, van Donk E, Ibelings BW (2005). Grazing on colo-
nial and filamentous, toxic and non-toxic cyanobacteria by the zebra mussel
Dreissena polymorpha. J Plankton Res. 27:331–339.
Dokulil MT, Mayer J (1996). Population dynamics and photosynthetic rates of a
Cylindrospermopsis-Limnothrix association in a highly eutrophic urban lake,
Alte Donau, Vienna, Austria. Arch Hydrobiol Algol Stud. 83:179–195
Dokulil MT, Teubner K (2000). Cyanobacterial dominance in lakes. Hydrobiologia.
438:1–12.
Dolman AM, Rücker J, Pick FR, Fastner J, Rohrlack T, Mischke U et al. (2012).
Cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins: the influence of nitrogen versus phosphorus.
PLoS One. 7:e38757.
Downing JA, Watson SB, McCauley E (2001). Predicting Cyanobacteria dominance
in lakes. Can J Fish Aquat Sci. 58:1905–1908.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 279
Dyble J, Fahnenstiel GL, Litaker RW, Millie DF, Tester PA (2008). Microcystin
concentrations and genetic diversity of Microcystis in the lower Great Lakes.
Environ Toxicol. 23:507–516.
Dyble J, Paerl HW, Neilan BA (2002). Genetic characterization of Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii (Cyanobacteria) isolates from diverse geographic origins based on
nifH and cpcBA-IGS nucleotide sequence analysis. Appl Environ Microbiol.
68:2567–2571.
Edmondson W, Litt AH (1982). Daphnia in lake Washington. Limnol Oceanogr.
27:272–293.
Elliott JA (2012). Is the future blue-green? A review of the current model predictions
of how climate change could affect pelagic freshwater cyanobacteria. Water
Res. 46:1364–1371.
Elser JJ, Bracken ME, Cleland EE, Gruner DS, Harpole WS, Hillebrand H et al. (2007).
Global analysis of nitrogen and phosphorus limitation of primary producers in
freshwater, marine and terrestrial ecosystems. Ecol Lett. 10:1135–1142.
Elser JJ, Urabe J (1999). The stoichiometry of consumer‐driven nutrient recycling:
Theory, observations, and consequences. Ecology. 80:735–751.
Ernst B, Hoeger SJ, O‘brien E, Dietrich DR (2009). Abundance and toxicity of
Planktothrix rubescens in the pre-alpine Lake Ammersee, Germany. Harmful
Algae. 8:329–342.
Fastner J, Abella S, Litt A, Morabito G, Vörös L, Pálffy K et al. (2016). Combating
cyanobacterial proliferation by avoiding or treating inflows with high P load –
experiences from eight case studies. Aquat Ecol. 50:367–383.
Fastner J, Beulker C, Geiser B, Hoffmann A, Kröger R, Teske K et al. (2018). Fatal
neurotoxicosis in dogs associated with tychoplanktic, anatoxin-a producing
Tychonema sp. in mesotrophic Lake Tegel, Berlin. Toxins. 10:60.
Fastner J, Erhard M, Carmichael WW, Sun F, Rinehart KL, Rönicke H et al. (1999).
Characterization and diversity of microcystins in natural blooms and strains
of the genera Microcystis and Planktothrix from German freshwaters. Arch
Hydrobiol. 145:147–163.
Fastner J, Erhard M, von Döhren H (2001a). Determination of oligopeptide diversity
within a natural population of Microcystis spp. (Cyanobacteria) by typing sin-
gle colonies by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass
spectrometry. Appl Environ Microbiol. 67:5069–5076.
Fastner J, Wirsing B, Wiedner C, Heinze R, Neumann U, Chorus I (2001b).
Cyanotoxin occurrence in Germany: microcystins and hepatocyte toxicity.
In: Chorus I, editors: Cyanotoxins: occurrence, causes, consequences. Berlin:
Springer:22–37.
Fergusson KM, Saint CP (2000). Molecular phylogeny of Anabaena circinalis and
its identification in environmental samples by PCR. Appl Environ Microbiol.
66:4145–4148.
Fetscher AE, Howard MDA, Stancheva R, Kudela RM, Stein ED, Sutula MA et al.
(2015). Wadeable streams as widespread sources of benthic cyanotoxins in
California, USA. Harmful Algae. 49:105–116.
Feuillade J (1994). The cyanobacterium (blue-green alga) Oscillatoria rubescens
D. C. Adv Limnol. 41:77–93.
Finlay BJ (2002). Global dispersal of free-living microbial eukaryote species. Science.
296:1061–1063.
280 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Foy R, Gibson C, Smith R (1976). The influence of daylength, light intensity and
temperature on the growth rates of planktonic blue-green algae. Brit Phycol J.
11:151–163.
Francis G (1878). Poisonous Australian lake. Nature. 18:11–12.
Frenken T, Wierenga J, Gsell AS, van Donk E, Rohrlack T, Van de Waal DB (2017).
Changes in N: P supply ratios affect the ecological stoichiometry of a toxic
cyanobacterium and its fungal parasite. Front Microbiol. 8:1015.
Gabriel J-P, Saucy F, Bersier L-F (2005). Paradoxes in the logistic equation? Ecol
Model. 185:147–151.
Gallina N, Beniston M, Jacquet S (2017). Estimating future cyanobacterial occur-
rence and importance in lakes: a case study with Planktothrix rubescens in
Lake Geneva. Aquat Sci. 79:249–263.
Gallon JR (2004). N-2 fixation by non-heterocystous cyanobacteria. In: Klipp W,
Masepohl B, Gallon JR et al., editors: Genetics and regulation of nitrogen fixa-
tion in free-living bacteria. Dordrecht: Springer:111–139.
Gammeter S, Zimmermann U (2001). Changes in phytoplankton productivity and
composition during re-oligotrophication in two Swiss lakes. Verh Int Verein
Limnol. 27:2190–2193.
Garcia-Pichel F, Belnap J, Neuer S, Schanz F (2003). Estimates of global cyanobacte-
rial biomass and its distribution. Algological Studies. 109:213–227.
Ger KA, Urrutia-Cordero P, Frost PC, Hansson L-A, Sarnelle O, Wilson AE et al.
(2016). The interaction between cyanobacteria and zooplankton in a more
eutrophic world. Harmful Algae. 54:128–144.
Giani A, Bird DF, Prairie YT, Lawrence JF (2005). Empirical study of cyanobacterial
toxicity along a trophic gradient of lakes. Can J Fish Aquat Sci. 62:2100–2109.
Gobler CJ, Burkholder JM, Davis TW, Harke MJ, Johengen T, Stow CA et al. (2016).
The dual role of nitrogen supply in controlling the growth and toxicity of cya-
nobacterial blooms. Harmful Algae. 54:87–97.
Gragnani A, Scheffer M, Rinaldi S (1999). Top-down control of cyanobacteria: a
theoretical analysis. Am Nat. 153:59–72.
Graham JL, Jones JR, Jones SB, Clevenger TE (2006). Spatial and temporal dynamics
of microcystin in a Missouri reservoir. Lake Reserv Manage. 22:59–68.
Gugger MF, Lenoir S, Berger C, Ledreux A, Druart JC, Humbert JF et al. (2005a).
First report in a river in France of the benthic cyanobacterium Phormidium
favosum producing anatoxin-a associated with dog neurotoxicosis. Toxicon.
45:919–928.
Gugger MF, Molica R, Le Berre B, Dufour P, Bernard C, Humbert JF (2005b).
Genetic diversity of Cylindrospermopsis strains (Cyanobacteria) isolated from
four continents. Appl Environ Microbiol. 71:1097–1100.
Haande S, Rohrlack T, Ballot A, Roberg K, Skulberg R, Beck M et al. (2008). Genetic
characterisation of Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Nostocales, Cyanobacteria)
isolates from Africa and Europe. Harmful Algae. 7:692–701.
Harris TD, Wilhelm FM, Graham JL, Loftin KA (2014). Experimental manipulation
of TN:TP ratios suppress cyanobacterial biovolume and microcystin concen-
tration in large-scale in situ mesocosms. Lake Reserv Manage. 30:72–83.
Haruštiaková D, Welker M (2017). Chemotype diversity in Planktothrix rubescens
(cyanobacteria) populations is correlated to lake depth. Environ Microbiol
Rep. 9:158–168.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 281
Havens K, Jeppesen E (2018). Ecological responses of lakes to climate change.
Water. 10:917.
Hesse K, Kohl J-G (2001). Effects of light and nutrients supply on growth and
microcystin content of different strains of Microcystis aeruginosa. In:
Chorus I, editors: Cyanotoxins: occurrence, causes, consequences. Berlin:
Springer:104–115.
Higgins SN, Paterson MJ, Hecky RE, Schindler DW, Venkiteswaran JJ, Findlay DL
(2018). Biological nitrogen fixation prevents the response of a eutrophic lake to
reduced loading of nitrogen: evidence from a 46-year whole-lake experiment.
Ecosystems. 21:1088–1100.
Honjo M, Matsui K, Ueki M, Nakamura R, Fuhrman JA, Kawabata Z (2006).
Diversity of virus-like agents killing Microcystis aeruginosa in a hyper-eutrophic
pond. J Plankton Res. 28:407–412.
Huber V, Wagner C, Gerten D, Adrian R (2012). To bloom or not to bloom: con-
trasting responses of cyanobacteria to recent heat waves explained by critical
thresholds of abiotic drivers. Oecologia. 169:245–256.
Huisman J, Codd GA, Paerl HW, Ibelings BW, Verspagen JM, Visser PM (2018).
Cyanobacterial blooms. Nat Rev Microbiol. 16:471.
Huisman J, Sharples J, Stroom JM, Visser PM, Kardinaal WEA, Verspagen JM et al.
(2004). Changes in turbulent mixing shift competition for light between phyto-
plankton species. Ecology. 85:2960–2970.
Humphries SE, Lyne VD (1988). Cyanophyte blooms: the role of cell buoyancy.
Limnol Oceanogr. 33:79–91.
Huszar V, Caraco N, Roland F, Cole J (2006). Nutrient-chlorophyll relationships
in tropical-subtropical lakes: do temperate models fit? In: Martinelli LA,
Howarth RW, editors: Nitrogen cycling in the Americas: natural and anthropo-
genic influences and controls. Netherlands: Springer:239–250.
Hutchinson PA, Webster IT (1994). On the distribution of blue-green algae in lakes:
wind-tunnel tank experiments. Limnol Oceanogr. 39:374–382.
Ibelings B, Kroon BM, Mur L (1994). Acclimation of Photosystem II in a cyano-
bacterium and a eukaryotic green alga to high and fluctuating photosynthetic
photon flux densities, simulating light regimes induced by mixing in lakes. New
Phytol. 128:407–424.
Ibelings BW, Maberly SC (1998). Photoinhibition and the availability of inorganic
carybon restrict photosynthesis by surface blooms of cyanobacteria. Limnol
Oceanogr. 43:408–419.
Ibelings BW, Mur LR, Kinsman R, Walsby AE (1991). Microcystis changes its buoy-
ancy in response to the average irradiance in the surface mixed layer. Arch
Hydrobiol. 120:385–401.
Ibelings BW, Portielje R, Lammens EH, Noordhuis R, van den Berg MS, Joosse W et al.
(2007). Resilience of alternative stable states during the recovery of shallow lakes
from eutrophication: Lake Veluwe as a case study. Ecosystems. 10:4–16.
Ibelings BW, Vonk M, Los HFJ, van der Molen DT, Mooij WM (2003). Fuzzy model-
ing of cyanobacterial surface waterblooms: validation with NOAA-AVHRR
satellite images. Ecol Appl. 13:1456–1472.
Ihle T, Jähnichen S, Benndorf J (2005). Wax and wane of Microcystis (cyanophyceae)
and microcystins in lake sediments: a case study in Quitzdorf reservoir (Germany).
J Phycol. 41:479–488.
282 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Imai H, Chang K-H, Nakano S-I (2009). Growth responses of harmful algal species
Microcystis (Cyanophyceae) under various environmental conditions. In: Obayashi
Y, Isobe T, Subramanian A et al., editors: Interdisciplinary studies on environmen-
tal chemistry—environmental research in Asia. Tokyo: Terrapub:269–275.
Jacoby JM, Burghdoff M, Williams G, Read L, Hardy J (2015). Dominant factors
associated with microcystins in nine midlatitude, maritime lakes. Inland Waters.
5:187–202.
Jacquet S, Kerimoglu O, Rimet F, Paolini G, Anneville O (2014). Cyanobacterial
bloom termination: the disappearance of Planktothrix rubescens from Lake
Bourget (France) after restoration. Freshwater Biol. 59:2472–2487.
Janse I, Kardinaal WEA, Meima M, Fastner J, Visser PM, Zwart G (2004). Toxic and
nontoxic Microcystis colonies in natural populations can be differentiated on
the basis of rRNA gene internal transcribed spacer. Appl Environ Microbiol.
70:3979–3987.
Janse I, Meima M, Kardinaal WEA, Zwart G (2003). High-resolution differentiation
of cyanobacteria by using rRNA-internal transcribed spacer denaturing gradi-
ent gel electrophoresis. Appl Environ Microbiol. 69:6634–6643.
Jensen J, Jeppesen E, Olrik K, Kristensen P (1994). Impact of nutrients and physical
factors on the shift from cyanobacterial to chlorophyte dominance in shallow
Danish lakes. Can J Fish Aquat Sci. 51:1692–1699.
Jeppesen E, Kristensen P, Jensen JP, Søndergaard M, Mortensen E, Lauridsen T
(1991). Recovery resilience following a reduction in external phosphorus load-
ing of shallow, eutrophic Danish lakes: duration, regulating factors and meth-
ods for overcoming resilience. Mem Ist Ital Idrobiol. 48:127–148.
Jeppesen E, Meerhoff M, Jacobsen B, Hansen R, Søndergaard M, Jensen J et al. (2007).
Restoration of shallow lakes by nutrient control and biomanipulation—the suc-
cessful strategy varies with lake size and climate. Hydrobiologia. 581:269–285.
Jeppesen E, Søndergaard M, Jensen JP (2003). Climatic warming and regime shifts in
lake food webs—some comments. Limnol Oceanogr 48:1346–1349.
Jeppesen E, Søndergaard M, Jensen JP, Havens KE, Anneville O, Carvalho L et al.
(2005). Lake responses to reduced nutrient loading–an analysis of contempo-
rary long‐term data from 35 case studies. Freshwater Biol. 50:1747–1771.
Jöhnk K, Huisman J, Sharples J, Sommeijer B, Visser P, Stroom J (2008). Summer
heatwaves promote blooms of harmful cyanobacteria. Global Change Biol.
14:495–512.
Jones GJ, Blackburn SI, Parker NS (1994). A toxic bloom of Nodularia spumi-
gena MERTENS in Orielton Lagoon, Tasmania. Aust J Mar Freshwater Res.
45:787–800.
Kardinaal WEA, Janse I, Kamst-van Agterveld MP, Meima M, Snoek J, Mur LR et al.
(2007). Microcystis genotype succession in relation to microcystin concentra-
tions in freshwater lakes. Aquat Microb Ecol. 48:1–12.
Kardinaal WEA, Visser PM (2005). Dynamics of cyanobacterial toxins: sources of
variability in microcystin concentrations. In: Huisman J, Matthijs HCP, Visser
PM, editors. Harmful cyanobacteria. Berlin: Springer:41–63.
Karlsson-Elfgren I, Rengefors K, Gustafsson S (2004). Factors regulating recruitment
from the sediment to the water column in the bloom-forming cyanobacterium
Gloeotrichia echinulata. Freshwater Biol. 49:265–273.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 283
Karlsson‐Elfgren I, Rydin E, Hyenstrand P, Pettersson K (2003). Recruitment and
pelagic growth of Gloeotrichia echinulata (Cyanophyceae) in Lake Erken.
J Phycol. 39:1050–1056.
Kasprzak P, Padisák J, Koschel R, Krienitz L, Gervais F (2008). Chlorophyll a con-
centration across a trophic gradient of lakes: An estimator of phytoplankton
biomass? Limnologica. 38:327–338.
Kinsman R, Ibelings BW, Walsby A (1991). Gas vesicle collapse by turgor pressure
and its role in buoyancy regulation by Anabaena flos-aquae. Microbiology.
137:1171–1178.
Kirk JTO (1994). Light and photosynthesis in aquatic ecosystems. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Klemer A, Feuillade J, Feuillade M (1982). Cyanobacterial blooms: carbon and nitro-
gen limitation have opposite effects on the buoyancy of Oscillatoria. Science.
215:1629–1631.
Kolzau S, Wiedner C, Rücker J, Köhler J, Köhler A, Dolman AM (2014). Seasonal
patterns of nitrogen and phosphorus limitation in four German lakes and the
predictability of limitation status from ambient nutrient concentrations. PLoS
One. 9:e96065.
Konopka A (1989). Metalimnetic cyanobacteria in hard‐water lakes: Buoyancy regu-
lation and physiological state. Limnol Oceanogr. 34:1174–1184.
Konopka A, Kromkamp JC, Mur LR (1987). Buoyancy regulation in phosphate-
limited cultures of Microcystis aeruginosa. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 45:135–142.
Kosten S, Huszar VL, Bécares E, Costa LS, Donk E, Hansson LA et al. (2012). Warmer
climates boost cyanobacterial dominance in shallow lakes. Global Change Biol.
18:118–126.
Kosten S, Huszar VL, Mazzeo N, Scheffer M, da SL Sternberg L, Jeppesen E (2009).
Lake and watershed characteristics rather than climate influence nutrient limi-
tation in shallow lakes. Ecol App. 19:1791–1804.
Kotak BG, Lam AKY, Prepas EE, Hrudey SE (2000). Role of chemical and physi-
cal variables in regulating microcystin-LR concentration in phytoplankton of
eutrophic lakes. Can J Fish Aquat Sci. 57:1584–1593.
Kromkamp J, Walsby AE (1990). A computer model of buoyancy and vertical migra-
tion in cyanobacteria. J Plankton Res. 12:161–183.
Kruk C, Mazzeo N, Lacerot G, Reynolds C (2002). Classification schemes for phyto-
plankton: a local validation of a functional approach to the analysis of species
temporal replacement. J Plankton Res. 24:901–912.
Kruskopf M, Flynn KJ (2006). Chlorophyll content and fluorescence responses can-
not be used to gauge reliably phytoplankton biomass, nutrient status or growth
rate. New Phytol. 169:525–536.
Kuno S, Yoshida T, Kaneko T, Sako Y (2012). Intricate interactions between the bloom-
forming cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa and foreign genetic elements,
revealed by diversified clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat
(CRISPR) signatures. Appl Environ Microbiol. 78:5353–5360.
Kurmayer R, Christiansen G, Chorus I (2003). The abundance of microcystin-
producing genotypes correlates positively with colony size in Microcystis sp
and determines its microcystin net production in Lake Wannsee. Appl Environ
Microbiol. 69:787–795.
284 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Kurmayer R, Christiansen G, Fastner J, Börner T (2004). Abundance of active and
inactive microcystin genotypes in populations of the toxic cyanobacterium
Planktothrix spp. Environ Microbiol. 6:831–841.
Kurmayer R, Gumpenberger M (2006). Diversity of microcystin genotypes among
populations of the filamentous cyanobacteria Planktothrix rubescens and Plank-
tothrix agardhii. Mol Ecol. 15:3849–3861.
Kurmayer R, Jüttner F (1999). Strategies for the co-existence of zooplankton with
the toxic cyanobacterium Planktothrix rubescens in Lake Zurich. J Plankton
Res. 21:659–683.
Lampert W, Fleckner W, Rai H, Taylor BE (1986). Phytoplankton control by graz-
ing zooplankton: A study on the spring clear‐water phase. Limnol Oceanogr.
31:478–490.
Lampert W, Sommer U (2007). Limnoecology: the ecology of lakes and streams. New
York: Oxford University Press:336 pp.
Lemaire V, Brusciotti S, van Gremberghe I, Vyverman W, Vanoverbeke J, De Meester
L (2012). Genotype×genotype interactions between the toxic cyanobacterium
Microcystis and its grazer, the waterflea Daphnia. Evol Appl. 5:168–182.
Li H, Sherman DM, Bao SL, Sherman LA (2001a). Pattern of cyanophycin accumula-
tion in nitrogen-fixing and non-nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria. Arch Microbiol.
176:9–18.
Li J, Dittrich M (2019). Dynamic polyphosphate metabolism in cyanobacteria
responding to phosphorus availability. Environ Microbiol. 21:572–583.
Li R, Carmichael WW, Brittain S, Eaglesham GK, Shaw GR, Mahakahant A et al.
(2001b). Isolation and identification of the cyanotoxin cylindrospermopsin
and deoxy-cylindrospermopsin from a Thailand strain of Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii (Cyanobacteria). Toxicon. 39:973–980.
Livingstone DM (2003). Impact of secular climate change on the thermal structure of
a large temperate central European lake. Climatic Change. 57:205–225.
Loftin KA, Graham JL, Hilborn ED, Lehmann SC, Meyer MT, Dietze JE et al. (2016).
Cyanotoxins in inland lakes of the United States: Occurrence and potential
recreational health risks in the EPA National Lakes Assessment 2007. Harmful
Algae. 56:77–90.
Loiselle SA, Cozar A, Dattilo A, Bracchini L, Galvez JA (2007). Light limitations to
algal growth in tropical ecosystems. Freshwater Biol. 52:305–312.
Long BM, Jones GJ, Orr PT (2001). Cellular microcystin content in N-limited
Microcystis aeruginosa can be predicted from growth rate. Appl Environ
Microbiol. 67:278–283.
Lürling M, Eshetu F, Faassen EJ, Kosten S, Huszar VLM (2013). Comparison of cya-
nobacterial and green algal growth rates at different temperatures. Freshwater
Biol. 58:552–559.
Mallet J (2012). The struggle for existence. how the notion of carrying capacity, K,
obscures the links between demography, Darwinian evolution and speciation.
Evol Ecol Res. 14:627–665.
Mamun M, An K-G (2017). Major nutrients and chlorophyll dynamics in Korean
agricultural reservoirs along with an analysis of trophic state index deviation.
J Asia-Pacific Biodiversity. 10:183–191.
Mantzouki E, Lürling M, Fastner J, de Senerpont Domis L, Wilk-Woźniak E,
Koreivienė J et al. (2018). Temperature effects explain continental scale distri-
bution of cyanobacterial toxins. Toxins. 10:156.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 285
Mantzouki E, Visser PM, Bormans M, Ibelings BW (2016). Understanding the key
ecological traits of cyanobacteria as a basis for their management and control
in changing lakes. Aquat Ecol. 50:333–350.
Martiny JB, Bohannan BJ, Brown JH, Colwell RK, Fuhrman JA, Green JL et al.
(2006). Microbial biogeography: putting microorganisms on the map. Nat Rev
Microbiol. 4:102–112.
Matveev V, Matveeva L, Jones GJ (1994). Study of the ability of Daphnia carinata
(King) to control phytoplankton and resist cyanobacterial toxicity: implica-
tions for biomanipulation in Australia. Mar Freshwater Res. 45:889–904.
McAllister TG, Wood SA, Hawes I (2016). The rise of toxic benthic Phormidium
proliferations: a review of their taxonomy, distribution, toxin content
and factors regulating prevalence and increased severity. Harmful Algae.
55:282–294.
Medrano EA, Uittenbogaard R, Pires LD, Van De Wiel B, Clercx H (2013). Coupling
hydrodynamics and buoyancy regulation in Microcystis aeruginosa for its ver-
tical distribution in lakes. Ecol Model. 248:41–56.
Mehnert G, Leunert F, Cirés S, Jöhnk KD, Rücker J, Nixdorf B et al. (2010).
Competitiveness of invasive and native cyanobacteria from temperate fresh-
waters under various light and temperature conditions. J Plankton Res.
32:1009–1021.
Meyer KA, Davis TW, Watson SB, Denef VJ, Berry MA, Dick GJ (2017). Genome
sequences of lower Great Lakes Microcystis sp. reveal strain-specific genes
that are present and expressed in western Lake Erie blooms. PLoS One. 12.
e0183859.
Michalak AM, Anderson EJ, Beletsky D, Boland S, Bosch NS, Bridgeman TB et al.
(2013). Record-setting algal bloom in Lake Erie caused by agricultural and
meteorological trends consistent with expected future conditions. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 110:6448–6452.
Miller TR, Bartlett S, Weirich CA, Hernandez J (2019). Automated sub-daily sam-
pling of cyanobacterial toxins on a buoy reveals new temporal patterns in toxin
dynamics. Environ Sci Technol. 53:5661–5670.
Mohamed ZA (2001). Accumulation of cyanobacterial hepatotoxins by Daphnia in
some Egyptian irrigation canals. Ecotoxicol Environ Safety. 50:4–8.
Mooij WM, Hülsmann S, De Senerpont Domis LN, Nolet BA, Bodelier PL, Boers
PC et al. (2005). The impact of climate change on lakes in the Netherlands: a
review. Aquat Ecol. 39:381–400.
Mooij WM, Trolle D, Jeppesen E, Arhonditsis G, Belolipetsky PV, Chitamwebwa
DB et al. (2010). Challenges and opportunities for integrating lake ecosystem
modelling approaches. Aquat Ecol. 44:633–667.
Moss B, Jeppesen E, Søndergaard M, Lauridsen TL, Liu Z (2013). Nitrogen, macro-
phytes, shallow lakes and nutrient limitation: resolution of a current contro-
versy? Hydrobiologia. 710:3–21.
Moss B, Kosten S, Meerhoff M, Battarbee RW, Jeppesen E, Mazzeo N et al. (2011).
Allied attack: climate change and eutrophication. Inland Waters. 1:101–105.
Mur L (1983). Some aspects of the ecophysiology of cyanobacteria. Annales de
l‘Institut Pasteur/Microbiologie. 134B:61–72.
Nalewajko C, Murphy TP (2001). Effects of temperature, and availability of nitrogen
and phosphorus on the abundance of Anabaena and Microcystis in Lake Biwa,
Japan: an experimental approach. Limnology. 2:45–48.
286 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Naselli-Flores L, Barone R, Chorus I, Kurmayer R (2007). Toxic cyanobacterial
blooms in reservoirs under a semiarid mediterranean climate: the magnifica-
tion of a problem. Environ Toxicol. 22:399–404.
Nehring S (1993). Mortality of dogs associated with a mass development of
Nodularia spumigena (Cyanophyceae) in a brackish lake at the German North
Sea coast. J Plankton Res. 15:867–872.
Neilan BA, Saker ML, Fastner J, Törökné AK, Burns BP (2003). Phylogeography
of the invasive cyanobacterium Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii. Mol Ecol.
12:133–140.
Novak JT, Brune DE (1985). Inorganic carbon limited growth kinetics of some fresh-
water algae. Water Res. 19:215–225.
Nürnberg GK (1996). Trophic state of clear and colored, soft-and hardwater lakes
with special consideration of nutrients, anoxia, phytoplankton and fish. Lake
Reserv Manage. 12:432–447.
Nürnberg GK, LaZerte BD, Olding DD (2003). An artificially induced Planktothrix
rubescens surface bloom in a small kettle lake in Southern Ontario compared
to blooms world-wide. Lake Reserv Manage. 19:307–322.
Oberhaus L, Briand JF, Leboulanger C, Jacquet S, Humbert JF (2007). Comparative
effects of the quality and quantity of light and temperature on the growth of
Planktothrix agardhii and P. rubescens. J Phycol. 43:1191–1199.
Odum EP (1953). Fundamentals of ecology, first edition. Philadelphia (PA): WB
Saunders.
Okello W, Ostermaier V, Portmann C, Gademann K, Kurmayer R (2010). Spatial
isolation favours the divergence in microcystin net production by Microcystis
in Ugandan freshwater lakes. Water Res. 44:2803–2814.
Oliver R, Ganf G (2000). Freshwater blooms. In: Whitton BA, Potts M, editors:
The ecology of cyanobacteria: their diversity in time and space. Dordrecht:
Springer:150–194.
Orr PT, Jones GJ (1998). Relationship between microcystin production and cell divi-
sion rates in nitrogen-limited Microcystis aeruginosa cultures. Limnol Oceanogr.
43:1604–1614.
Orr PT, Rasmussen JP, Burford MA, Eaglesham GK, Lennox SM (2010). Evaluation
of quantitative real-time PCR to characterise spatial and temporal variations in
cyanobacteria, Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Woloszynska) Seenaya et Subba
Raju and cylindrospermopsin concentrations in three subtropical Australian
reservoirs. Harmful Algae. 9:243–254.
Otsuka S, Suda S, Li R, Watanabe M, Oyaizu H, Matsumoto S et al. (1999).
Characterization of morphospecies and strains of the genus Microcystis (Cyano-
bacteria) for a reconsideration of species classification. Phycol Res. 47:189–197.
Otten TG, Paerl HW, Dreher TW, Kimmerer WJ, Parker AE (2017). The molecu-
lar ecology of Microcystis sp. blooms in the San Francisco Estuary. Environ
Microbiol. 19:3619–3637.
Ozawa K, Fujioka H, Muranaka M, Yokoyama A, Katagami Y, Homma T et al. (2005).
Spatial distribution and temporal variation of Microcystis species composition
and microcystin concentration in Lake Biwa. Environ Toxicol. 20:270–276.
Padisák J (1997). Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Woloszynska) Seenayya et Stubba
Raju, an expanding, highly adaptive cyanobacterium: worldwide distribution
and review of its ecology. Arch Hydrobiol Suppl. 107:563–593.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 287
Padisák J, Crossetti LO, Naselli-Flores L (2009). Use and misuse in the application
of the phytoplankton functional classification: a critical review with updates.
Hydrobiologia. 621:1–19.
Paerl HW, Huisman J (2009). Climate change: a catalyst for global expansion of
harmful cyanobacterial blooms. Environ Microbiol Rep. 1:27–37.
Paerl HW, Scott JT, McCarthy MJ, Newell SE, Gardner WS, Havens KE et al. (2016).
It takes two to tango: when and where dual nutrient (N & P) reductions are
needed to protect lakes and downstream ecosystems. Environ Sci Technol.
50:10805–10813.
Paterson M, Schindler D, Hecky R, Findlay D, Rondeau K (2011). Comment: Lake
227 shows clearly that controlling inputs of nitrogen will not reduce or prevent
eutrophication of lakes. Limnol Oceanogr. 56:1545–1547.
Phillips G, Pietiläinen O-P, Carvalho L, Solimini A, Solheim AL, Cardoso A (2008).
Chlorophyll–nutrient relationships of different lake types using a large European
dataset. Aquat Ecol. 42:213–226.
Piccini C, Aubriot L, Fabre A, Amaral V, González-Piana M, Giani A et al. (2011).
Genetic and eco-physiological differences of South American Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii isolates support the hypothesis of multiple ecotypes. Harmful Algae.
10:644–653.
Porat R, Teltsch B, Perelman A, Dubinsky Z (2001). Diel buoyancy changes by the cya-
nobacterium Aphanizomenon ovalisporum from a shallow reservoir. J Plankton
Res. 23:753–763.
Posch T, Köster O, Salcher MM, Pernthaler J (2012). Harmful filamentous cyano-
bacteria favoured by reduced water turnover with lake warming. Nat Clim
Change. 2:809.
Preston T, Stewart WDP, Reynolds CS (1980). Bloom-forming cyanobacte-
rium Microcystis aeruginosa overwinters on sediment surface. Nature.
288:365–367.
Price GD, Badger MR, Woodger FJ, Long BM (2007). Advances in understanding the
cyanobacterial CO2-concentrating-mechanism (CCM): functional components,
Ci transporters, diversity, genetic regulation and prospects for engineering into
plants. J Exp Bot. 59:1441–1461.
Pridmore RD, Etheredge MK (1987). Planktonic cyanobacteria in New Zealand inland
waters: distribution and population dynamics. New Zeal J Mar Freshwater Res.
21:491–502.
Ptacnik R, Lepistö L, Willén E, Brettum P, Andersen T, Rekolainen S et al. (2008).
Quantitative responses of lake phytoplankton to eutrophication in Northern
Europe. Aquat Ecol. 42:227–236.
Quiblier C, Wood SA, Echenique-Subiabre I, Heath M, Villeneuve A, Humbert JF
(2013). A review of current knowledge on toxic benthic freshwater cyanobacteria–
ecology, toxin production and risk management. Water Res. 47:5464–5479.
Rabouille S, Salençon M-J (2005). Functional analysis of Microcystis vertical
migration: a dynamic model as a prospecting tool. II. Influence of mixing, ther-
mal stratification and colony diameter on biomass production. Aquat Microb
Ecol. 39:281–292.
Raikow DF, Sarnelle O, Wilson AE, Hamilton SK (2004). Dominance of the noxious
cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa in low‐nutrient lakes is associated with
exotic zebra mussels. Limnol Oceanogr. 49:482–487.
288 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Recknagel F, Orr PT, Bartkow M, Swanepoel A, Cao H (2017). Early warning of
limit-exceeding concentrations of cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins in drinking
water reservoirs by inferential modelling. Harmful Algae. 69:18–27.
Redfield A (1934). On the proportions of organic derivations in seawater and
their relation to the composition of plankton (reprint). In: Daniel R, editors:
James Johnstone memorial volume. Liverpool: University Press of Liverpool:
176–192.
Reeders H, Boers P, Van der Molen D, Helmerhorst T (1998). Cyanobacterial domi-
nance in the lakes Veluwemeer and Wolderwijd, The Netherlands. Wat Sci
Technol. 37:85–92.
Reynolds C (1994). The ecological basis for the successful biomanipulation of aquatic
communities. Arch Hydrobiol. 130:1–33.
Reynolds C (1999a). Modelling phytoplankton dynamics and its application to lake
management. Hydrobiologia. 395:123–131.
Reynolds C, Maberly S (2002). A simple method for approximating the supportive
capacities and metabolic constraints in lakes and reservoirs. Freshwater Biol.
47:1183–1188.
Reynolds CS (1984). The ecology of freshwater phytoplankton. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press:396 pp.
Reynolds CS (1997). Vegetation processes in the pelagic: a model for ecosystem theory.
Oldendorf/Luhe: Ecology Institute:371 pp.
Reynolds CS (1999b). Non-determinism to probability, or N: P in the community
ecology of phytoplankton: nutrient ratios. Arch Hydrobiol. 146:23–35.
Reynolds CS (2006). The ecology of phytoplankton. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press:552 pp.
Reynolds CS, Huszar V, Kruk C, Naselli-Flores L, Melo S (2002). Towards a functional
classification of the freshwater phytoplankton. J Plankton Res. 24:417–428.
Reynolds CS, Jaworsky GHM, Cmiech HA, Leedale GF (1981). On the annual cycle
of Microcystis aeruginosa Kütz emend. Elenkin. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B.
293:419–477.
Reynolds CS, Maberly SC, Parker JE, De Ville MM (2012). Forty years of monitor-
ing water quality in Grasmere (English Lake District): separating the effects of
enrichment by treated sewage and hydraulic flushing on phytoplankton ecology.
Freshwater Biol. 57:384–399.
Rigosi A, Carey CC, Ibelings BW, Brookes JD (2014). The interaction between cli-
mate warming and eutrophication to promote cyanobacteria is dependent on
trophic state and varies among taxa. Limnol Oceanogr. 59:99–114.
Rohrlack T (2018). Low temperatures can promote cyanobacterial bloom formation
by providing refuge from microbial antagonists. AIMS Microbiol. 4:304–318.
Rohrlack T, Christiansen G, Kurmayer R (2013). Putative antiparasite defensive sys-
tem involving ribosomal and nonribosomal oligopeptides in cyanobacteria of
the genus Planktothrix. Appl Environ Microbiol. 79:2642–2647.
Romo S, Soria J, Fernandez F, Ouahid Y, Barón-Solá Á (2013). Water residence time
and the dynamics of toxic cyanobacteria. Freshwater Biol. 58:513–522.
Rücker J, Wiedner C, Zippel P (1997). Factors controlling the dominance of Planktothrix
agardhii and Limnothrix redekei in eutrophic shallow lakes. Hydrobiologia.
342/343:107–115.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 289
Saker ML, Griffiths DJ (2000). The effect of temperature on growth and cylindrosper-
mopsin content of seven isolates of Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Nostocales,
Cyanophyceae) from water bodies in northern Australia. Phycologia. 39:349–354.
Salas HJ, Martino P (1991). A simplified phosphorus trophic state model for warm-
water tropical lakes. Water Res. 25:341–350.
Salk KR, Bullerjahn GS, McKay RML, Chaffin JD, Ostrom NE (2018). Nitrogen
cycling in Sandusky Bay, Lake Erie: oscillations between strong and weak export
and implications for harmful algal blooms. Biogeosciences. 15:2891–2907.
Salmaso N, Boscaini A, Capelli C, Cerasino L (2018). Ongoing ecological shifts in a
large lake are driven by climate change and eutrophication: evidences from a
three-decade study in Lake Garda. Hydrobiologia. 824:177–195.
Salmaso N, Capelli C, Shams S, Cerasino L (2015). Expansion of bloom-forming
Dolichospermum lemmermannii (Nostocales, Cyanobacteria) to the deep lakes
south of the Alps: colonization patterns, driving forces and implications for
water use. Harmful Algae. 50:76–87.
Salmaso N, Cerasino L, Boscaini A, Capelli C (2016). Planktic Tychonema (Cyano-
bacteria) in the large lakes south of the Alps: phylogenetic assessment and toxi-
genic potential. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 92:fiw155.
Salmaso N, Copetti D, Cerasino L, Shams S, Capelli C, Boscaini A et al. (2014).
Variability of microcystin cell quota in metapopulations of Planktothrix rubes-
cens: causes and implications for water management. Toxicon. 90:82–96.
Sandrini G, Matthijs HC, Verspagen JM, Muyzer G, Huisman J (2014). Genetic
diversity of inorganic carbon uptake systems causes variation in CO response
2
of the cyanobacterium Microcystis. ISME J. 8:589.
Sarnelle O (1993). Herbivore effects on phytoplankton succession in a eutrophic
lake. Ecol Monogr. 63:129–149.
Sayre NF (2008). The genesis, history, and limits of carrying capacity. Ann Assoc Am
Geogr. 98:120–134.
Schanz F (1994). Oligotrophication of Lake Zürich as reflected in Secchi depth mea-
surements. Ann Limnol. 30:57–65.
Scheffer M, Rinaldi S, Gragnani A, Mur LR, van Nes EH (1997). On the dominance
of filamentous cyanobacteria in shallow, turbid lakes. Ecology. 78:272–282.
Schindler DW (2006). Recent advances in the understanding and management of
eutrophication. Limnol Oceanogr. 51:356–363.
Schindler DW, Carpenter SR, Chapra SC, Hecky RE, Orihel DM (2016). Reducing
phosphorus to curb lake eutrophication is a success. Environ Sci Technol.
50:8923–8929.
Schindler DW, Hecky R, Findlay D, Stainton M, Parker B, Paterson M et al. (2008).
Eutrophication of lakes cannot be controlled by reducing nitrogen input:
results of a 37-year whole-ecosystem experiment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
105:11254–11258.
Scott JT, Marcarelli AM (2012). Cyanobacteria in freshwater benthic environments.
In: Whitton BA, editors: Ecology of Cyanobacteria II, second edition. Dordrecht:
Springer:271–289.
Scott JT, McCarthy MJ (2010). Nitrogen fixation may not balance the nitrogen
pool in lakes over timescales relevant to eutrophication management. Limnol
Oceanogr. 55:1265–1270.
290 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Scott JT, McCarthy MJ (2011). Response to comment: nitrogen fixation has not
offset declines in the Lake 227 nitrogen pool and shows that nitrogen control
deserves consideration in aquatic ecosystems. Limnol Oceanogr. 56:1548–1550.
Shams S, Capelli C, Cerasino L, Ballot A, Dietrich DR, Sivonen K et al. (2015).
Anatoxin-a producing Tychonema (Cyanobacteria) in European waterbodies.
Water Res 69:68–79.
Shapiro J (1997). The role of carbon dioxide in the initiation and maintenance of
blue-green dominance in lakes. Freshwater Biol. 37:307–323.
Shatwell T, Köhler J (2019). Decreased nitrogen loading controls summer cyanobac-
terial blooms without promoting nitrogen‐fixing taxa: long‐term response of a
shallow lake. Limnol Oceanogr. 64:S166–S178.
Simon RD (1971). Cyanophycin granules from the blue-green alga Anabaena cylin-
drica: a reserve material consisting of copolymers of aspartic acid and arginine.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 68:265–267.
Sinang SC, Reichwaldt ES, Ghadouani A (2013). Spatial and temporal variability
in the relationship between cyanobacterial biomass and microcystins. Environ
Monit Assess. 185:6379–6395.
Sitoki L, Kurmayer R, Rott E (2012). Spatial variation of phytoplankton composi-
tion, biovolume, and resulting microcystin concentrations in the Nyanza Gulf
(Lake Victoria, Kenya). Hydrobiologia. 691:109–122.
Sivonen K (1990). Effects of light, temperature, nitrate, orthophosphate, and bacte-
ria on growth of and hepatotoxin production by Oscillatoria agardhii strains.
Appl Environ Microbiol. 56:2658–2666.
Skulberg OM, Skulberg R (1985). Planktic species of Oscillatoria (Cyanophyceae)
from Norway. Characterization and classification. Arch Hydrobiol Algol Stud.
38–39:157–174.
Smith FM, Wood SA, van Ginkel R, Broady PA, Gaw S (2011). First report of
saxitoxin production by a species of the freshwater benthic cyanobacterium,
Scytonema Agardh. Toxicon 57:566–573.
Smith VH (1983). Low nitrogen to phosphorus ratios favor dominance by blue-green
algae in lake phytoplankton. Science. 221:669–671.
Søndergaard M, Lauridsen TL, Johansson LS, Jeppesen E (2017). Nitrogen or phos-
phorus limitation in lakes and its impact on phytoplankton biomass and sub-
merged macrophyte cover. Hydrobiologia. 795:35–48.
Soto D (2002). Oligotrophic patterns in southern Chilean lakes: the relevance of
nutrients and mixing depth. Revista Chilena de Historia Natural. 75:377–393.
Steenhauer LM, Wierenga J, Carreira C, Limpens RW, Koster AJ, Pollard PC et al.
(2016). Isolation of cyanophage CrV infecting Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii
and the influence of temperature and irradiance on CrV proliferation. Aquatic
Microbial Ecol. 78:11–23.
Steffen MM, Davis TW, McKay RML, Bullerjahn GS, Krausfeldt LE, Stough JM
et al. (2017). Ecophysiological examination of the Lake Erie Microcystis bloom
in 2014: linkages between biology and the water supply shutdown of Toledo,
OH. Environ Sci Technol. 51:6745–6755.
Stein JR, Hellebust JA, Craigie J, editors (1980). Handbook of phycological meth-
ods: culture methods and growth measurements. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press. Sterner RW (2008). On the phosphorus limitation paradigm
for lakes. Int Rev Hydrobiol. 93:433–445.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 291
Sterner RW, Andersen T, Elser JJ, Hessen DO, Hood JM, McCauley E et al. (2008).
Scale‐dependent carbon:nitrogen:phosphorus seston stoichiometry in marine
and freshwaters. Limnol Oceanogr. 53:1169–1180.
Stough JM, Tang X, Krausfeldt LE, Steffen MM, Gao G, Boyer GL et al. (2017).
Molecular prediction of lytic vs lysogenic states for Microcystis phage: Meta-
transcriptomic evidence of lysogeny during large bloom events. PLoS One
12:e0184146.
Stumm W, Morgan JJ (1996). Aquatic chemistry: chemical equilibria and rates in
natural waters, third edition. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons:1040 pp.
Suda S, Watanabe MM, Otsuka S, Mahakahant A, Yongmanitchai W, Nopartnaraporn
N et al. (2002). Taxonomic revision of water-bloom-forming species of oscil-
latoroid cyanobacteria. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 52:1577–1595.
Šulčius S, Mazur-Marzec H, Vitonytė I, Kvederavičiūtė K, Kuznecova J, Šimoliūnas E
et al. (2018). Insights into cyanophage-mediated dynamics of nodularin and other
non-ribosomal peptides in Nodularia spumigena. Harmful Algae 78:69–74.
Svirčev Z, Lalić D, Savić GB, Tokodi N, Backović DD, Chen L et al. (2019). Global
geographical and historical overview of cyanotoxin distribution and cyanobac-
terial poisonings. Arch Toxicol. 93:2429–2481.
Takamura N, Yasuno M, Sugahara K (1984). Overwintering of Microcystis aerugi-
nosa Kütz. in a shallow lake. J Plankton Res. 6:1019–1029.
Teubner K, Feyerabend R, Henning M, Nicklisch A, Woitke P, Kohl J-G (1999).
Alternative blooming of Aphanizomenon flos-aquae or Planktothrix agardhii
induced by the timing of the critical nitrogen:phosphorus ratio in hypertrophic
riverine lakes. Arch Hydrobiol Spec Issues Advanc Limnol. 54:325–344.
Thomas MK, Litchman E (2016). Effects of temperature and nitrogen availability on
the growth of invasive and native cyanobacteria. Hydrobiologia. 763:357–369.
Triest L, Stiers I, Van Onsem S (2016). Biomanipulation as a nature-based solution to
reduce cyanobacterial blooms. Aquat Ecol. 50:461–483.
Uehlinger U (1981). Experimentelle Untersuchungen zur Autökologie von Aphani-
zomenon flos-aquae. Algol Stud/Arch Hydrobiol. 60:260–288.
Van Liere L, Mur LR (1980). Occurrence of Oscillatoria agardhii and some related
species, a survey. SIL Workshop on Hypertrophic Ecosystems, Växjö, Sweden.
Dordrecht:Springer:67–77.
Van Wichelen J, van Gremberghe I, Vanormelingen P, Debeer AE, Leporcq B,
Menzel D et al. (2010). Strong effects of amoebae grazing on the biomass and
genetic structure of a Microcystis bloom (Cyanobacteria). Environ Microbiol.
12:2797–2813.
Van Wichelen J, Vanormelingen P, Codd GA, Vyverman W (2016). The common
bloom-forming cyanobacterium Microcystis is prone to a wide array of micro-
bial antagonists. Harmful Algae. 55:97–111.
Vanderploeg HA, Liebig JR, Carmichael WW, Agy MA, Johengen TH, Fahnenstiel
GL et al. (2001). Zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha) selective filtration pro-
moted toxic Microcystis blooms in Saginaw Bay (Lake Huron) and Lake Erie.
Can J Fish Aquat Sci. 58:1208–1221.
Vasas G, Surányi G, Bácsi I, Márta M, Máthé C, Gonda S et al. (2013). Alteration of
cylindrospermopsin content of Aphanizomenon ovalisporum (Cyanobacteria,
Nostocales) due to step-down from combined nitrogen to dinitrogen. Adv
Microbiol. 3:557.
292 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Verspagen JMH, Snelder EOFM, Visser PM, Huisman J, Mur LR, Ibelings BW (2004).
Recruitment of benthic Microcystis (Cyanophyceae) to the water column: inter-
nal buoyancy changes or resuspension? J Phycol. 40:260–270.
Visser PM, Ibelings BW, Bormans M, Huisman J (2016a). Artificial mixing to control
cyanobacterial blooms: a review. Aquat Ecol. 50:423–441.
Visser PM, Passarge J, Mur LR (1997). Modelling vertical migration of the cyano-
bacterium Microcystis. Hydrobiologia. 349:99–109.
Visser PM, Verspagen JM, Sandrini G, Stal LJ, Matthijs HC, Davis TW et al. (2016b).
How rising CO and global warming may stimulate harmful cyanobacterial
2
blooms. Harmful Algae. 54:145–159.
Vollenweider RA (1968). Scientific fundamentals of the eutrophication of lakes and
flowing waters, with particular reference to nitrogen and phosphorus as factors
in eutrophication. Paris: OECD. 1–250.
Vollenweider RA (1976). Advances in defining critical loading levels for phosphorus
in lake eutrophication. Mem Ist Ital Idrobiol. 33:53–83.
Vollenweider RA, Kerekes JJ (1982). Eutrophication of waters. Monitoring, assess-
ment and control. Paris: Environment Directorate OECD:154 pp.
Wagner C, Adrian R (2009). Cyanobacteria dominance: quantifying the effects of
climate change. Limnol Oceanogr. 54:2460–2468.
Wallace BB, Hamilton DP (2000). Simulation of water-bloom formation in the cya-
nobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa. J Plankton Res. 22:1127–1138.
Walsby A, Schanz F (2002). Light‐dependent growth rate determines changes in the
population of Planktothrix rubescens over the annual cycle in Lake Zürich,
Switzerland. New Phytol. 154:671–687.
Walsby AE (2005). Stratification by cyanobacteria in lakes: a dynamic buoyancy
model indicates size limitations met by Planktothrix rubescens filaments. New
Phytol. 168:365–376.
Wang S, Zhu L, Li Q, Li G, Li L, Song L et al. (2015). Distribution and population
dynamics of potential anatoxin-a-producing cyanobacteria in Lake Dianchi,
China. Harmful Algae. 48:63–68.
Welker M, Brunke M, Preussel K, Lippert I, von Döhren H (2004a). Diversity and
distribution of Microcystis (Cyanobacteria) oligopeptide chemotypes from nat-
ural communities studied by single colony mass spectrometry. Microbiology.
150:1785–1796.
Welker M, Christiansen G, von Döhren H (2004b). Diversity of coexisting Planktothrix
(Cyanobacteria) chemotypes deduced by mass spectral analysis of microcystins
and other oligopeptides. Arch Microbiol. 182:288–298.
Welker M, Erhard M (2007). Consistency between chemotyping of single fila-
ments of Planktothrix rubescens (cyanobacteria) by MALDI-TOF and the
peptide patterns of strains determined by HPLC-MS. J Mass Spectrom.
42:1062–1068.
Welker M, Šejnohová L, von Döhren H, Nemethova D, Jarkovsky J, Maršálek B
(2007). Seasonal shifts in chemotype composition of Microcystis sp. communi-
ties in the pelagial and the sediment of a shallow reservoir. Limnol Oceanogr.
52:609–619.
Welker M, von Döhren H, Täuscher H, Steinberg CEW, Erhard M (2003). Toxic
Microcystis in shallow lake Müggelsee (Germany) - dynamics, distribution,
diversity. Arch Hydrobiol. 157:227–248.
4 Conditions determining occurrence 293
Wetzel RG (2001). Limnology: lake and river ecosystems, third edition. San Diego
(CA): Academic Press. 1005 pp.
Whitton BA (2012). Ecology of cyanobacteria II: their diversity in space and time.
New York: Springer:760 pp.
Wiedner C, Rücker J, Brüggemann R, Nixdorf B (2007). Climate change affects
timing and size of populations of an invasive cyanobacterium in temperate
regions. Oecologia. 152:473–484.
Wiedner C, Visser PM, Fastner J, Metcalf JS, Codd GA, Mur LR (2003). Effects of
light on the microcystin content of Microcystis strain PCC 7806. Appl Environ
Microbiol. 69:1475–1481.
Wilson AE, Sarnelle O, Tillmanns AR (2006a). Effects of cyanobacterial toxicity
and morphology on the population growth of freshwater zooplankton: meta-
analyses of laboratory experiments. Limnol Oceanogr. 51:1915–1924.
Wilson AE, Wilson WA, Hay ME (2006b). Intraspecific variation in growth and mor-
phology of the bloom-forming cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa. Appl
Environ Microbiol. 72:7383–7389.
Winder M, Sommer U (2012). Phytoplankton response to a changing climate.
Hydrobiologia. 698:1–12.
Wood SA, Biessy L, Puddick J (2018). Anatoxins are consistently released into the
water of streams with Microcoleus autumnalis-dominated (cyanobacteria) pro-
liferations. Harmful Algae. 80:88–95.
Wood SA, Depree C, Brown L, McAllister T, Hawes I (2015). Entrapped sediments as
a source of phosphorus in epilithic cyanobacterial proliferations in low nutri-
ent rivers. PLoS One. 10:e0141063.
Wood SA, Kelly LT, Bouma‐Gregson K, Humbert JF, Laughinghouse IV HD,
Lazorchak J et al. (2020) Toxic benthic freshwater cyanobacterial
proliferations: Challenges and solutions for enhancing knowledge and
improving monitoring and mitigation. Freshwater Biol. 65:1824–1842.
Wood SA, Puddick J (2017). The abundance of toxic genotypes is a key contribu-
tor to anatoxin variability in Phormidium-dominated benthic mats. Marine
Drugs. 15:307.
Wood SA, Selwood AI, Rueckert A, Holland PT, Milne JR, Smith KF et al. (2007).
First report of homoanatoxin-a and associated dog neurotoxicosis in New
Zealand. Toxicon. 50:292–301.
Yepremian C, Gugger MF, Briand E, Catherine A, Berger C, Quiblier C et al. (2007).
Microcystin ecotypes in a perennial Planktothrix agardhii bloom. Water Res.
41:4446–4456.
Yoshida T, Takashima Y, Tomaru Y, Shirai Y, Takao Y, Hiroishi S et al. (2006).
Isolation and characterization of a cyanophage infecting the toxic cyanobacte-
rium Microcystis aeruginosa. Appl Environ Microbiol. 72:1239–1247.
Yoshida-Takashima Y, Yoshida M, Ogata H, Nagasaki K, Hiroishi S, Yoshida T
(2012). Cyanophage infection in the bloom-forming cyanobacteria Microcystis
aeruginosa in surface freshwater. Microbes Environ. 27:350–355.
Yuan LL, Jones JR (2020). Rethinking phosphorus–chlorophyll relationships in
lakes. Limnol Oceanogr. 65:1847–1857.
Zhang X, Xie P, Huang X (2008). A review of nontraditional biomanipulation. Sci
World J. 8:1184–1196.
Ziegler K, Diener A, Herpin C, Richter R, Deutzmann R, Lockau W (1998).
294 Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water
Molecular characterization of cyanophycin synthetase, the enzyme catalyzing
the biosynthesis of the cyanobacterial reserve material multi‐L‐arginyl‐poly‐L‐
aspartate (cyanophycin). Eur J Biochem. 254:154–159.
Zimmermann U (1969). Ökologische und physiologische Untersuchungen an der plank-
tischen Blaualge Oscillatoria rubescens DC unter besonderer Berücksichtigung
von Licht und Temperatur. Schweiz Z Hydrol. 31:1–58.
Znachor P, Jurczak T, Komárková-Legnerová J, Jezberova J, Mankiewicz J,
Kastovska K et al. (2006). Summer changes in cyanobacterial bloom compo-
sition and microcystin concentration in eutrophic Czech reservoirs. Environ
Toxicol. 21:236–243.