GUIDELINES FOR DRINKING-WATER QUALITY 12. CHEMICAL FACT SHEETS
are mostly a consequence of the presence of cyanogen chloride, it is not considered
necessary to develop a guideline value for long-term exposure to cyanide.
Cyanobacterial toxins: Microcystin-LR
Among the cyanobacterial toxins, microcystins are the best-researched group and
probably occur most frequently in fresh waters. Many practical considerations for
the abatement of microcystins apply similarly to the other cyanotoxins (i.e. cylindro-
spermopsins, saxitoxins, anatoxin-a and anatoxin-a(s)), with one key difference that
is relevant to the efficacy of their removal in drinking-water treatment: microcystins
are usually cell-bound, and substantial amounts are released to the surrounding water
only in situations of cell rupture (i.e. lysis), whereas the other cyanotoxins may occur
to a larger extent dissolved in water.
Although microcystins may occur in fish, molluscs and shellfish from water bodies
with cyanobacterial proliferation, human exposure to microcystins is largely through
drinking-water or recreational use of water bodies with cyanobacterial blooms.
Among the more than 80 microcystins identified to date, only a few occur fre-
quently and in high concentrations. Microcystin-LR is among the most frequently
occurring and most toxic microcystin congeners. It is the only one for which enough
toxicological data are available with which to derive a provisional guideline value. Fre-
quently occurring cyanobacterial genera that may contain microcystins are Microcystis,
Planktothrix and Anabaena (see also section 11.5).
Provisional guideline value Total microcystin-LR (free plus cell-bound): 0.001 mg/l (1 µg/l)
The guideline value is provisional, as it covers only microcystin‑LR, the
database is limited and new data for the toxicity of cyanobacterial toxins
are being generated.
TDI 0.04 µg/kg body weight, based on liver pathology observed in a 13‑week
study in mice and applying an uncertainty factor of 1000, taking into
consideration limitations in the database, in particular lack of data on
chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity
Limit of detection 0.1–1 µg/l by HPLC following extraction of cells with 75% aqueous
methanol or following concentration of microcystins from liquid
samples on C‑18; will allow differentiation between variants where
standards are available
0.1–0.5 µg/l by commercially available immunoassay kits (enzyme‑linked
immunosorbent assay) for microcystins dissolved in water or in aqueous
extracts of cells; will detect most microcystins; these are less precise in
quantification than HPLC, but useful for screening
0.5–1.5 µg/l by protein phosphatase assay for microcystins dissolved in
water or in aqueous extracts of cells; will detect all microcystins; this assay
is less precise in quantification and identification than HPLC, but useful for
screening
Monitoring The preferred approach is visual monitoring (including microscopy for
potentially microcystin‑containing genera) of source water for evidence
of increasing cyanobacterial cell density (blooms) or bloom‑forming
potential and increased vigilance where such events occur
344
GUIDELINES FOR DRINKING-WATER QUALITY 12. CHEMICAL FACT SHEETS
Prevention and treatment Actions to decrease the probability of bloom occurrence include
catchment and source water management, such as reducing nutrient
loading or changing reservoir stratification and mixing. Treatment
effective for the removal of cyanobacteria includes filtration to remove
intact cells. Treatment effective against free microcystins in water (as
well as most other free cyanotoxins) includes oxidation through ozone
or chlorine at sufficient concentrations and contact times, as well as GAC
and some PAC applications (see the supporting document Management
of cyanobacteria in drinking-water supplies; Annex 1).
Guideline value derivation
•
allocation to water 80% of TDI
•
weight 60 kg adult
•
consumption 2 litres/day
Assessment date 2003
Principal references Chorus & Bartram (1999) Toxic cyanobacteria in water
WHO (2003) Cyanobacterial toxins: Microcystin-LR in drinking-water
Microcystin-LR is a potent inhibitor of eukaryotic protein serine/threonine phos-
phatases 1 and 2A. The primary target for microcystin toxicity is the liver, as micro-
cystins cross cell membranes chiefly through the bile acid transporter. Guideline value
derivation was based on an oral 13-week study with mice, supported by an oral 44-day
study with pigs. A large number of poisonings of livestock and wildlife have been re-
corded. Evidence of tumour promotion has been published. In 2006, IARC classified
microcystin-LR as a possible carcinogen (Group 2B).
Practical considerations
Cyanobacteria occur widely in lakes, reservoirs, ponds and slow-flowing rivers. Where
their excessive growth leads to high cell numbers, sometimes termed “bloom” events,
their toxins can reach concentrations in raw water that are potentially hazardous to
human health. Blooms occur if concentrations of nutrients (phosphorus and nitro-
gen) are elevated, particularly in stagnant or very slowly flowing water bodies. Blooms
tend to recur in the same water bodies. Cells of some cyanobacterial species may ac-
cumulate at the surface as scums or at the thermocline of thermally stratified res-
ervoirs. Such accumulations may develop rapidly, and they may be of very variable
duration (hours to weeks). In many circumstances, blooms and accumulations are
seasonal.
A variety of resource protection and source management actions are available to
decrease the probability of bloom occurrence. Among these, the most sustainable and
effective measure is to reduce nutrient (particularly phosphorus) concentrations in
the water body to levels sufficiently low to substantially limit the amount of cyano-
bacterial biomass that can grow. This is achieved by controlling nutrient loads from
sewage effluents and from land areas. The latter involves controlling erosion as well as
the amount of manure and fertilizers spread in the catchment. Further, hydrological
management actions such as water body mixing and flushing can render hydrophysic-
al conditions less suitable for cyanobacteria and thus shift plankton species from
cyanobacteria to others (i.e. planktonic algae such as diatoms) that are less relevant to
human health.
344 345
GUIDELINES FOR DRINKING-WATER QUALITY 12. CHEMICAL FACT SHEETS
As microcystins almost always occur largely cell-bound, any drinking-water treat-
ment that removes particles—i.e. soil or riverbank filtration, flocculation and filtra-
tion or dissolved air filtration—controls them effectively if the process is optimized to
target their removal. This also applies to the cell-bound fraction of other cyanotoxins.
Process operation should avoid cell rupture and toxin release. Hazardously high con-
centrations of dissolved cyanotoxins appear to occur less frequently. They are well
removed by most types of activated carbon. Chlorination and ozonation are effective
for the removal of many cyanotoxins at sufficiently high doses and contact times, but
not very effective for saxitoxins. Potassium permanganate is effective for microcystins,
whereas limited or no data are available at present for other toxins. Chlorine dioxide
and chloramine are ineffective for removing cyanotoxins.
Cyanotoxin monitoring is most effectively based on surveillance of source water
for evidence of cyanobacterial blooms or bloom-forming potential (i.e. nutrient levels
and phytoplankton species composition), with vigilance increased where such events
occur. In contrast, monitoring finished water against target cyanotoxin concentrations
is unsatisfactory for determining whether or not it is safe, because of the large variety
of toxins (particularly of microcystins), the lack of guideline values for all but one
(i.e. microcystin-LR) against which to monitor and the lack of analytical standards
for many. Analysis of cyanotoxins is particularly useful for validating and optimizing
the efficacy of control measures such as riverbank filtration or treatment. A caveat in
cyanotoxin analysis is the need for extraction of the cell-bound fraction from the cells;
although this is easy to do, particularly for microcystins, neglecting extraction from
cells will lead to dramatic underestimation of concentrations.
Cyanogen chloride
Cyanogen chloride may be formed as a by-product of chloramination or chlorination
of water. It is also formed by the chlorination of cyanide ion present in raw water.
Reason for not establishing Occurs in drinking‑water at concentrations well below those of health
a guideline value concern
Assessment date 2009
Principal references IPCS (2004) Hydrogen cyanide and cyanides
WHO (2009) Cyanogen chloride in drinking-water
Cyanogen chloride is rapidly metabolized to cyanide in the body. There are few
data available on the oral toxicity of cyanogen chloride.
As cyanogen chloride is unlikely to be found in drinking-water at concentrations
that are of health concern, it is considered unnecessary to develop a formal guideline
value for cyanogen chloride. Instead, for guidance purposes, a health-based value is
derived based on cyanide.
Using a NOAEL for cyanide of 4.5 mg/kg body weight per day for minor changes
in the testis in a subchronic study in which rats were exposed through their drink-
ing-water and an uncertainty factor of 100, a TDI for cyanide of 0.045 mg/kg body
weight (corresponding to a cyanogen chloride dose of 0.11 mg/kg body weight) can be
346