SeClear
Algaecide and Water Quality Enhancer®
For use in aquatic sites including: ponds, lakes, reservoirs, irrigation and drainage
canals, laterals and ditches; including potable water sources.
Active Ingredient:
Copper Sulfate Pentahydrate† (CAS# 7758-99-8)..................................16.2%
Other Ingredients..................................................................................83.8%
TOTAL..................................................................................................100.0%
†Metallic Copper equivalent = 4.1%
This product contains 0.417 lbs. metallic copper per gallon.
KEEP OUT OF REACH OF CHILDREN
CAUTION / PRECAUCIÓN
Refer to the QR code inside of the booklet for the Spanish translation. Consulte el
código QR dentro del folleto para ver la traducción al español.
Si usted no entiende la etiqueta, busque a alguien para que se la explique a usted en
detalle. (If you do not understand the label, find someone to explain it to you in detail.)
Refer to label booklet for additional Precautionary Statements and Directions for
Use including First Aid and Storage and Disposal.
Notice: Read the entire label before using. Use only according to label directions.
A Maximum Use Level
Before buying or using this product, read Warranty Disclaimer and Misuse statements
of 24 mg/L is required
inside label booklet. If terms are unacceptable, return at once unopened.
for the product.
EPA Reg. No. 67690-55
EPA Est. No. 067690-NC-002 Net contents: 2.5 gallon (Non-refillable)
1010.225 161008
2023-05-15 FPL20251201-ESP
FIRST AID
If swallowed • Call a poison control center or doctor immediately for treatment advice.
• Have person sip a glass of water if able to swallow.
• Do not induce vomiting unless told to do so by a poison control center or doctor.
• Do not give anything to an unconscious person.
If in eyes • Hold eye open and rinse slowly and gently with water for 15 to 20 minutes. Remove
contact lenses, if present, after the first 5 minutes; then continue rinsing eye.
• Call a poison control center or doctor for treatment advice.
If on skin or • Take off contaminated clothing.
clothing • Rinse skin immediately with plenty of water for 15 to 20 minutes.
• Call a poison control center or doctor for treatment advice.
If inhaled • Move person to fresh air.
• If person is not breathing, call 911 or an ambulance; then give artificial respiration,
preferably mouth-to-mouth, if possible.
• Call a poison control center or doctor for further treatment advice.
HOTLINE NUMBER
Have the product container or label with you when calling a poison control center or doctor, or going for
treatment. In case of emergency endangering health or the environment involving this product, call
INFOTRAC at 1-800-535-5053.
PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS
HAZARDS TO HUMANS AND DOMESTIC ANIMALS
CAUTION.
Harmful if swallowed. Causes moderate eye irritation. Avoid contact with skin, eyes or clothing. Wash
thoroughly with soap and water after handling and before eating, drinking, chewing gum, using tobacco or using
the toilet. Remove and wash contaminated clothing before reuse.
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (PPE)
Applicators and other handlers must wear:
• Long-sleeve shirt;
• Long pants; and
• Shoes plus socks.
2
USER SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
Follow manufacturer’s instructions for cleaning/maintaining PPE. If no such instructions for washables exist,
use detergent and hot water. Keep and wash PPE separately from other laundry. Keep and wash PPE
separately from other laundry. Discard clothing and other absorbent material that have been drenched or heavily
contaminated with this product’s concentrate. Do not reuse them.
ENGINEERING CONTROLS
Pilots must use an enclosed cab that meets the definition listed in the WPS for agricultural pesticides (40 CFR
170.305).
USER SAFETY RECOMMENDATIONS
Users should:
• Wash hands before eating, drinking, chewing gum, using tobacco or using the toilet.
• Remove clothing/PPE immediately if pesticide gets inside. Then wash thoroughly and put on clean
clothing.
• Remove PPE immediately after handling this product. Wash the outside of gloves before removing. As
soon as possible, wash thoroughly and change into clean clothing.
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS
Fish Advisory Statement: This copper product is toxic to fish and aquatic organisms. Unlike most organic
pesticides, copper is an element and will not break down in the environment and will therefore accumulate
with repeated applications. Copper is a micronutrient, but its pesticidal application rate exceeds the amount of
copper needed as a nutrient.
Waters treated with this product may be hazardous to aquatic organisms. Treatment of aquatic weeds
and algae can result in oxygen loss from decomposition of biomass. This oxygen loss can cause fish and
invertebrate suffocation. To minimize this hazard, do not treat more than ½ of the water body and wait at
least 14 days between treatments at avoid depletion of oxygen due to decaying vegetation (excluding water
infrastructure and constructed conveyances such as drainage canals, ditches and pipelines or intakes and
aqueducts for drinking water or irrigation use). Begin treatment along the shore and proceed outwards in bands
to allow fish to move into untreated areas. Consult with the State or local agency with primary responsibility for
regulating pesticides before applying to public waters, to determine if a permit is required.
Application of algaecides to high density blooms of cyanobacteria can result in the release of intracellular
contents into the water. Some of these intracellular compounds are known mammalian hepato- and nervous
system toxins. Therefore, to minimize the risk of toxin leakage, manage cyanobacteria effectively in order to
avoid applying this product when blooms of toxin-producing cyanobacteria are present at high density. In
situations where rapidly reproducing toxic algal species pose a public health threat to drinking or recreational
water resources, applicators must receive authorization from applicable state, local or tribal water resources
authorities to apply copper at intervals shorter than 14 days should the circumstance demand.
3
Certain water conditions including low pH (≤6.5), low dissolved organic carbon (DOC) levels (3.0 mg/L or lower),
and “soft” waters (i.e., alkalinity less than 50 mg/L), increase the potential acute toxicity to non-target aquatic
organisms. The application rates on this label are appropriate for water with pH values > 6.5, DOC levels >3.0
mg/L, and alkalinity greater than 50 mg/L. Avoid treating waters with pH values <6.5, DOC levels <3.0, and
alkalinity less than 50 ppm (e.g., soft or acid waters), as koi, trout and other sensitive species of fish may be
killed under such conditions.
Consult your state department of natural resources or fish and game agency before applying this product to
public waters. Permits may be required before treating such waters.
DIRECTIONS FOR USE
It is a violation of Federal Law to use this product in a manner inconsistent with its labeling. Read all Directions
for Use carefully before applying.
DO NOT apply this product in a way that will contact workers or other persons, either directly or through drift.
Only protected handlers may be in the area during application. For any requirements specific to your State or
Tribe, consult the agency responsible for pesticide regulation.
Ensure spray does not drift onto non-target areas.
DO NOT apply this product in any manner not specifically described in this label. Observe all cautions and
limitations on this label and on the labels of products used in combination with this product. Keep containers
closed to avoid spills and contamination.
PRODUCT INFORMATION
Treatment with this product will not by itself make water potable. For applications in waters destined for use as
drinking water, those waters must receive additional and separate potable water treatment. Do not apply more
than 1.0 ppm of metallic copper in these waters during any single treatment.
Controlling Algae
This product rapidly disrupts numerous algae cell processes and shuts down growth. It is effective in controlling
a broad range of algae including: green, yellow/green and blue-green (cyanobacteria) algae comprising diverse
growth forms such as filamentous, colonial, planktonic and macrophytic. Treated algae typically begin to show
discoloration within a day and degrade over time.
Improving Water Quality
This product can improve water quality by:
1. Offsetting eutrophication through proactive maintenance programs.
2. Decreasing phosphorus concentrations from the water column through binding and precipitation of excess
phosphorus.
3. Binding and precipitating suspended solids, thereby reducing turbidity and unwanted coloration.
4
Use lower concentrations/rates in softer water (<50 ppm alkalinity) or when treating algae with greater
susceptibility to this product; use moderate to higher concentrations/rates in harder water (>50 ppm alkalinity)
and when treating heavier infestations and/or less susceptible algae.
Treatment Notes
Performance of this product is enhanced under certain conditions. SEPRO recommends consulting a SEPRO
Aquatic Specialist for guidance in implementing a treatment program to achieve optimal results. To achieve
optimum effectiveness, consider:
• Proactive Control: Treat when algae growth first begins to appear (if possible). Continue to proactively offset
algae infestations and improve water quality by sustaining a routine maintenance program.
• Reactive Control: Treat when algae are actively growing and select appropriate rates based on site
conditions.
• Apply in a manner that will ensure even distribution of this product within the treatment area.
• To optimize exposure and control, use a high-pressure spray application to break up dense algae mats.
• In heavily infested areas, follow-up applications may be necessary. Re-treat areas if re-growth begins to
appear or if seasonal control is desired.
• SEPRO recommends designing and implementing an annual maintenance program which includes
monitoring algae and basic water quality parameters to optimize nuisance algae control and water
quality management. Contact SEPRO Corporation for assistance in algae identification, treatment
prescription and implementation using this product (Note: SEPRO Corporation’s technical service of
algae identification, site monitoring and assessment is referred to as SeSCRIPT® analysis -
252-437-3282).
Resistance Management
Water bodies or management units should be scouted prior to application to identify the weed species present
and their growth stage to determine if the intended application will be effective. Water bodies or management
units should be scouted after application to verify that the treatment was effective.
Suspected herbicide-resistant weeds may be identified by these indicators:
• Failure to control a weed species normally controlled by the herbicide at the dose applied, especially if control
is achieved on adjacent weeds;
• A spreading patch of non-controlled plants of a particular weed species; and
• Surviving plants mixed with controlled individuals of the same species.
Report any incidence of non-performance of this product against a particular weed species to your retailer,
or local SEPRO representative. If resistance is suspected, treat weed escapes with an herbicide having a
different mechanism of action and/or use non-chemical means to remove escapes, as practical, with the goal of
preventing further reproduction.
Implement the Early Detection, Rapid Response practice and Maintenance Control by using the following
practices where possible:
5
• Identify weeds present in a management unit through scouting or history of the water body and understand
the biology of target species.
• Applications should target weeds when populations are small and there is low biomass, early in the season to
maximize efficacy.
• Applications should be made so that the herbicide contacts the weed. Use the appropriate application method
for the use site/weed/chemical combination.
• Weed escapes should not be allowed to go to seed or produce asexual vegetative propagules.
• Use a diversified approach toward weed management. Whenever possible incorporate multiple weed-control
practices such as mechanical control, biological management practices, and rotation of MOAs.
• Time applications to have the highest probability for control and minimize need for follow-up control
measures. Apply during conditions that minimize herbicide degradation (light /temperature/microbes) and/or
dissipation (water exchange).
Contact your local SEPRO representative, local water management agency, or extension agent to find out if
suspected resistant weeds to this MOA have been found in your region. If resistant biotypes of target weeds
have been reported, use the application rates of this product specified or your local conditions. Tank mix
products so that there are multiple effective mechanisms of actions for each target weed.
Use Restrictions
• Do not apply an undiluted solution of this product directly to, or otherwise permit it to come into contact with
any desirable plants as injury may result. Do not apply in such a way that this concentrated product comes in
contact with crops, ornamentals, grass or other desirable plants.
• Pilots must use an enclosed cab that meets the definition listed in the WPS for agricultural pesticides (40 CFR
170.305).
Use Precautions
• Wash spray equipment thoroughly before and after each application.
APPLICATION DIRECTIONS
Do not exceed a concentration of 1.0 ppm copper (6.57 gallons of product or 2.74 lbs metallic copper per acre-
foot) during any single application. When treating aquaculture ponds when fish are present do not exceed a
concentration of 0.4 ppm during any single application when targeting nuisance algae.
Whole Waterbodies
Maximum annual application rate of 21.9 lbs of metallic copper per acre-foot (8 applications per year at up to
1 ppm). This rate/frequency is calculated based on staggering the treatment of each half of the water body
every 14 days (at a rate of 2.74 lbs. metallic copper per acre-foot = 1 ppm) for eight months (244 days). In
situations where rapidly reproducing toxic algal species pose a public health threat to drinking or recreational
water resources, applicators must receive authorization from applicable state, local or tribal water resources
authorities to apply copper in excess of 21.9 lbs of metallic copper per acre-foot (8 applications per year at up
to 1 ppm).
6
Water Management Units
For large waterbodies such as lakes and reservoirs that support aquatic habitat, this product may be applied in
multiple individual treatments to different, discreet sections of a waterbody, or water management units, within
the 14-day retreatment interval, provided that the sum of those areas together constitute no more than half of
the total area of the entire waterbody. Maximum annual application rate of 46.6 lbs. of metallic copper per acre-
foot per year (17 applications per year at up to 1 ppm). This rate/frequency is calculated based on the maximum
number of possible applications allowed based on a 14-day minimum (at a rate of 2.74 lbs. metallic copper per
acre-foot = 1 ppm) retreatment interval for eight months (244 days). Do not apply more than 46.6 lbs. of metallic
copper to a water management unit, regardless of the pest(s) targeted by applications. In situations where
rapidly reproducing toxic algal species pose a public health threat to drinking or recreational water resources,
applicators must receive authorization from applicable state, local or tribal water resources authorities to apply
copper in excess of 46.6 lbs. of metallic copper per acre-foot per year for a single water management unit.
Pre-Application Dose Determination
For algae and aquatic plant treatments, applicators should conduct initial dose determination test simulating
a full scale treatment program to determine the minimum efficacious concentrations for eliminating the target
species, unless an effective dose is already known for the given target pest population.
Surface Spray/Injection Algaecide Application
The application rates in Table 1 are based on static or minimal flow situations. Where significant dilution occurs
from untreated waters or loss of water, this product may have to be metered in (refer to the Drip System or
Metering Pump Application for Flowing Water Treatments section of this label).
Identify the algae growth present as one of the following types: planktonic (suspended), filamentous (mat
forming), or macrophytic algae (Chara/Nitella). For assistance with algae identification, contact SEPRO
Corporation (252-437-3282).
Determine the surface acreage (1 acre = 43,560 ft2) and average depth of infested area.
Refer to chart below to determine the application rate per acre foot (one acre of water, one foot deep).
7
TABLE 1
Application Rates
Algae Type or PPM metallic Gallons per Treatment Comments
Species Copper Acre Foot
Planktonic 0.15-1.0† 1.0 - 6.5 Apply higher rates on heavy blooms and where algae
(Suspended) masses are clumped and accumulated.
Filamentous 0.15-1.0† 1.0 - 6.5 Apply higher rates on surface mats and species
(Mat-forming) such as Pithophora, Cladophora, Lyngbya, and
Hydrodictyon.
Macrophytic 0.4-1.0 2.5 - 6.5 Apply higher rates on older, established calcified
(Chara/Nitella/Starry plants. Apply as close to algae growth as possible.
Stonewort)
† For planktonic and filamentous algae, this product may be applied up to 1.0 ppm when growth conditions
require higher rates and for difficult to control species (such as Hydrodictyon, Cladophora or Pithophora).
Application Rate Calculation Example:
The amount of this product to be applied to provide the desired concentration of 0.15 ppm of active ingredient
in a 1 acre treatment area with an average depth of 4 feet may be calculated at follows:
1 acre X 4 foot average depth = 4 acre feet
1.0 gallon per acre foot x 4 acre feet = 4 gallons
For planktonic (suspended) algae and free floating filamentous algae mats, application rates and techniques
should be based on treating to depths where algae are present (e.g. the upper 3 to 4 feet of water). For dense
infestations and in certain other situations, it may be necessary to calculate rates based on the depth of known
algae infestation (e.g. >4 feet) or require treating the entire water column in the target area.
As a surface or subsurface application, this product may be applied diluted or undiluted, whichever is most
suitable to ensure uniform coverage of the area to be treated. Dilution with water may be necessary at the lower
application rates. Dilute the required amount of this product with enough water to ensure even distribution in
the treated area with the type of equipment being used. For best results, dilute this product in water to provide
a minimum spray mix of 20 to 50 gallons per acre; in areas with heavy infestations of filamentous algae, a total
tank mix of >50 gallons per acre may be necessary; break up floating algae mats before spraying or while
application is being made.
8
Drip System or Metering Pump Application for Flowing Water Treatments
For Use in Potable Water, Canals, Ditches, and Irrigation and Drainage Systems
For optimal control, apply this product as soon as algae begin active growth or interfere noticeably with
normal delivery of water (clogging of head gates, suction screens, weed screens, and siphon tubes). Delaying
treatment could perpetuate the problem by causing massing and compacting of biomass. Heavy infestations
and low flow may cause poor distribution resulting in unsatisfactory control. Under these conditions, repeated
applications or increasing water flow rate during application may be necessary.
To achieve desired control in flowing waters, maintain a minimum exposure period of one to three hours at
a concentration of 0.15 to 1.0 ppm. Other factors to consider include: weed or algae species, density of
infestation and water temperature and hardness. Longer contact times and the highest rates may be required
for less susceptible algae species and in difficult treatment conditions (e.g. less susceptible weed or algae
species, dense weed or algae beds, hard water).
Prior to treatment it is important to accurately determine water flow rates. In the absence of weirs, orifices, or
similar devices, which give accurate waterflow measurements, volume of flow can be estimated by the following
formula:
Cubic feet per second (CFS) = average width (feet) x average depth (feet) x average
velocity† (feet/second) x 0.9
†: The velocity can be estimated by determining the length of time it takes a floating object to travel a defined
distance. Divide the distance (feet) by the time (seconds) to estimate velocity (feet/seconds). This measure
should be repeated 3 times at the intended application site and then used to calculate the average velocity.
After accurately determining the water flow rate in CFS or gallons/minute, find the corresponding application
rate in Table 2 or use the formula below.
CFS X desired concentration of metallic copper (ppm) x 2.1 = quarts/hour of application
9
TABLE 2
Application Rates For Flowing Water
Water Flow Rate PPM metallic Rate
Copper
CFS Gal/ min. Quart/ hr. fl. oz./ min.
1 450 0.15 - 1.0 0.3 - 2.1 0.2 - 1.1
2 900 0.15 - 1.0 0.7 - 4.2 0.4 - 2.2
3 1,350 0.15 - 1.0 1.0 - 6.4 0.6 - 3.4
4 1,800 0.15 - 1.0 1.4 - 8.5 0.7 - 4.5
5 2,250 0.15 - 1.0 1.7 - 10.7 0.9 - 5.7
10 4,500 0.15 - 1.0 3.4 - 21.4 1.8 - 11.4
100 45,000 0.15 - 1.0 34.3 - 214.5 18.3 - 114.3
Calculate the amount of product needed to maintain the drip rate for a treatment period of 3 hours by
multiplying quart(s)/hour by 3 or fl. oz./minute by 180. For longer injection periods, multiply dosage rate by
desired time in minutes or hours as appropriate.
Lower concentrations may be used on highly susceptible algae species or if longer exposure times are
maintained. When possible, introduce the chemical in the channel at weirs or other turbulence-creating
structures to promote the dispersion of the chemical. For longer injection periods, multiply the rate by the
desired time in minutes or hours as appropriate.
Use a drum or tank equipped with a valve or other volume control device that can be calibrated to maintain a
constant drip rate. Use a stopwatch and appropriate measuring container to set the desired drip rate. Readjust
accordingly if the canal flow rate changes during the treatment period. A small pump or other metering device
may be used to meter this product into the water more accurately. Application can be made using diluted or
undiluted product.
Results can vary depending upon species and density of algae and vegetation, desired distance of control and
flow rate, and impact of water quality on efficacy. Periodic maintenance treatments may be required to maintain
seasonal control. SEPRO recommends consulting a SEPRO Aquatic Specialist to determine optimal use rate,
location of treatment stations and treatment period under local conditions.
Pulse Application Method
This method may only be used in constructed irrigation conveyance systems, laterals and aqueducts. Do not
use this method of application in locations with functioning potable water intakes at or downstream from the
10
application site.
For optimal control, apply as soon as algae begin active growth or interfere noticeably with normal delivery of
water. Heavy infestations and low flow may cause poor distribution resulting in unsatisfactory control. Under
these conditions repeated applications or increasing water flow rate during application may be necessary.
Maximum annual application rate of 13 lbs metallic copper per year per 5 miles of conveyance per cubic foot
per second (CSF). Apply product into irrigation conveyance system or lateral at up to a maximum rate of 0.5
lbs metallic copper (1.22 gallons of product) per cubic foot per second of water per 5 to 30-mile treatment
depending on water hardness, alkalinity and algae concentration. High water hardness or alkalinity levels may
require the use of higher rates within the rate range above to achieve control. When velocity levels are higher
(>1 foot per second) distance between drop stations for pulse applications can be increased.
Tank Mix Directions
This product may be tank mixed with other products to enhance efficacy and plant selectivity provided that the
labels do not prohibit such mixing. This product can be tank mixed with herbicides registered for aquatic use
to improve efficacy; and to control algae in areas where heavy algae growth may cover target submersed plant
species and interfere with herbicide exposure. When tank mixing, read and follow the label for each tank mix
product. Use in accordance with the most restrictive label limitations and precautions of the products used
in the tank-mix. Do not exceed any label rate or dose. To ensure compatibility, conduct a jar test before field
application of any tank mix combination. SEPRO recommends consulting with a SEPRO Aquatic Specialist for
latest tank mix recommendations.
Tank mixing or use of this product with any other product which is not specifically and expressly authorized by
the label shall be at the exclusive risk of the user, applicator and/or application adviser, to the extent allowed by
applicable law.
11
Spray Drift Management
Aerial Applications
• Do not release spray at a height greater than 10 ft above the vegetative canopy or water, unless a greater
application height is necessary for pilot safety.
• Applicators are required to use a medium or coarser droplet size (ASABE S572.1).
• Do not apply when wind speed exceeds 15 mph at the application site. If the windspeed is greater than 10
mph, the boom length must be 65% or less of the wingspan for fixed wing aircraft and 75% or less of the
rotor diameter for helicopters. Otherwise, the boom length must be 75% or less of the wingspan for fixed-
wing aircraft and 90% or less of the rotor diameter for helicopters.
• Applicators must use ½ swath displacement upwind at the downwind edge of the application area.
• Do not apply during temperature inversions.
Ground Boom Applications
• Apply with the spray release height recommended by the manufacturer, but no more than 4 feet above the
water surface.
• Applicators are required to use a medium or coarser droplet size (ASABE S572.1).
• Do not apply when wind speeds exceed 15 miles per hour at the application site.
• Do not apply during temperature inversions.
Spray Drift Advisories
The applicator is responsible for avoiding off-site spray drift. Be aware of nearby non-target sites and
environmental conditions.
Importance of Droplet Size
An effective way to reduce spray drift is to apply large droplets. Use the largest droplets that provide target
pest control. While applying larger droplets will reduce spray drift, the potential for drift will be greater if
applications are made improperly or under unfavorable environmental conditions.
Controlling Droplet Size – Ground Boom
• Volume - Increasing the spray volume so that larger droplets are produced will reduce spray drift. Use the
highest practical spray volume for the application. If a greater spray volume is needed, consider using a nozzle
with a higher flow rate.
• Pressure - Use the lowest spray pressure recommended for the nozzle to produce the target spray volume
and droplet size.
• Spray Nozzle - Use a spray nozzle that is designed for the intended application. Consider using nozzles
designed to reduce drift.
Controlling Droplet Size – Aircraft
• Adjust Nozzles - Follow nozzle manufacturers recommendations for setting up nozzles. Generally, to reduce
12
fine droplets, nozzles should be oriented parallel with the airflow in flight.
Boom Height – Ground Boom
Use the lowest boom height that is compatible with the spray nozzles that will provide uniform coverage. For
ground equipment, the boom should remain level with the crop and have minimal bounce.
Release Height - Aircraft
Higher release heights increase the potential for spray drift. When applying aerially to crops, do not release
spray at a height greater than 10 ft above the crop canopy, unless a greater application height is necessary for
pilot safety.
Shielded Sprayers
Shielding the boom or individual nozzles can reduce spray drift. Consider using shielded sprayers. Verify that
the shields are not interfering with the uniform deposition of the spray on the target area.
Temperature and Humidity
When making applications in hot and dry conditions, use larger droplets to reduce effects of evaporation.
Temperature Inversions
Drift potential is high during a temperature inversion. Temperature inversions are characterized by increasing
temperature with altitude and are common on nights with limited cloud cover and light to no wind. The
presence of an inversion can be indicated by ground fog or by the movement of smoke from a ground source
or an aircraft smoke generator. Smoke that layers and moves laterally in a concentrated cloud (under low wind
conditions) indicates an inversion, while smoke that moves upward and rapidly dissipates indicates good
vertical air mixing. Avoid applications during temperature inversions.
Wind
Drift potential generally increases with wind speed. AVOID APPLICATIONS DURING GUSTY WIND
CONDITIONS.
Applicators need to be familiar with local wind patterns and terrain that could affect spray drift.
13
STORAGE AND DISPOSAL
Do not contaminate water, food, or feed by improper storage or disposal.
Pesticide Storage: Keep from freezing. Store in original container only. Do not store near feed or food-
stuffs. In case of leak or spill, use absorbent materials to contain liquids and dispose as waste.
Pesticide Disposal: Wastes resulting from use of this product may be used according to label directions or
disposed of at an approved waste disposal facility.
Container Handling
Non-refillable Container. DO NOT reuse or refill this container. Triple rinse or pressure rinse container
(or equivalent) promptly after emptying; then offer for recycling, if available, or reconditioning, if appropriate,
or puncture and dispose of in a sanitary landfill, or by incineration, or by other procedures approved by state
and local authorities..
Triple rinse containers small enough to shake (capacity ≤ 5 gallons) as follows: Empty the remaining
contents into application equipment or a mix tank and drain for 10 seconds after the flow begins to drip. Fill
the container ¼ full with water and recap. Shake for 10 seconds. Pour rinsate into application equipment
or a mix tank, or store rinsate for later use or disposal. Drain for 10 seconds after the flow begins to drip.
Repeat this procedure two more times.
Triple rinse containers too large to shake (capacity >5 gallons) as follows: Empty the remaining contents
into application equipment or a mix tank. Fill the container ¼ full with water. Replace and tighten closures.
Tip container on its side and roll it back and forth, ensuring at least one complete revolution, for 30 seconds.
Stand the container on its end and tip it back and forth several times. Turn the container over onto its other
end and tip it back and forth several times. Empty the rinsate into application equipment or a mix tank, or
store rinsate for later use or disposal. Repeat this procedure two more times.
Pressure rinse as follows: Empty the remaining contents into application equipment or mix tank and
continue to drain for 10 seconds after the flow begins to drip. Hold container upside down over application
equipment or mix tank, or collect rinsate for later use or disposal. Insert pressure rinsing nozzle in the side of
the container and rinse at about 40 PSI for at least 30 seconds. Drain for 10 seconds after the flow begins to
drip.
IN CASE OF EMERGENCY
In case of large-scale spillage regarding this product, call INFOTRAC at 1-800-535-5053.
Steps to be taken in case material is released or spilled:
• Dike and contain the spill with inert material (sand, earth, etc.) and transfer liquid and solid diking material to
separate containers for disposal.
• Remove contaminated clothing, and wash affected skin areas with soap and water.
• Wash clothing before reuse.
• Keep the spill out of all sewers and open bodies of water.
14
Warranty Disclaimer: SEPRO Corporation warrants that this product conforms to the chemical description
on the product label. Testing and research have also determined that this product is reasonably fit for the uses
described on the product label. To the extent consistent with applicable law, SEPRO Corporation makes no
other express or implied warranty of fitness or merchantability nor any other express or implied warranty and
any such warranties are expressly disclaimed.
Misuse: Federal law prohibits the use of this product in a manner inconsistent with its label directions. To
the extent consistent with applicable law, the buyer assumes responsibility for any adverse consequences if
this product is not used according to its label directions. In no case shall SEPRO Corporation be liable for any
losses or damages resulting from the use, handling or application of this product in a manner inconsistent with
its label.
For additional important labeling information regarding SEPRO Corporation’s Terms and Conditions of Use,
Inherent Risks of Use and Limitation of Remedies, please visit http://SEPROlabels.com/terms or scan the image
below.
Scan QR code for
Spanish translation.
Escanee el código
QR para traducción
al español.
SeClear Algaecide and Water Quality Enhancer is a registered trademark of SEPRO Corporation.
© 2025 SEPRO Corporation
15
16
1010.225
COPPER GROUP NOTCLASSIFIED HERBICIDE
FIRST AID
SeClear
If • Call a poison control center or doctor immediatelyfor
swallowed treatment advice.
Algaecide and Water Quality Enhancer® •Have person sip a glass of water ifable toswallow.
• Do not induce vomiting unless told to do so by a poison
Active Ingredient: control center or doctor.
Copper SulfatePentahydrate† (CAS# 7758-99-8)........................................16.2% • Do not give anything to an unconscious person.
OtherIngredients......................................................................................83.8% If ineyes • Hold eye open and rinse slowlyandgentlywithwater for
TOTAL.......................................................................................................100.0% 15to20minutes.Removecontactlenses,ifpresent,after
†Metallic Copper equivalent = 4.1% thefirst 5 minutes; then continue rinsing eye.
This product contains 0.417 lbs. metallic copper per gallon. • Call a poison control center or doctor for treatment advice.
KEEP OUT OF REACH OF CHILDREN If on skin •Takeoffcontaminatedclothing.
orclothing • Rinse skin immediatelywith plentyofwaterfor15to 20
CAUTION / PRECAUCIÓN minutes.
• Call a poison control center or doctor for treatment advice.
Si usted no entiende la etiqueta, busque a alguien para que se la explique a If inhaled • Move person to fresh air.
usteden detalle. (If you do not understand the label,find someoneto explainit •Ifpersonisnot breathing, call 911 or an ambulance; then
to youin detail.) give artificialrespiration, preferably mouth-to-mouth,if
possible.
PRECAUTIONARYSTATEMENTS • Call a poison control center or doctor for further treatment
advice.
HAZARDS TO HUMANS AND DOMESTIC ANIMALS
HOTLINE NUMBER
CAUTION. Harmfulifswallowed.Causesmoderate eye irritation.Avoid contact
withskin, eyes orclothing.Wash thoroughly with soap and waterafterhandling Have the product container or label with you when calling a poison control
and before eating, drinking,chewinggum, using tobacco or using the toilet. center ordoctor, orgoing fortreatment. Incase of emergencyendangering
Remove and wash contaminatedclothingbefore reuse. health or the environment involving this product,callINFOTRAC at
1-800-535-5053.
Refer to label booklet for additional PrecautionaryStatementsand
Directions for Use. STORAGEAND DISPOSAL
Notice: Read the entire label before using. Use only according to label direc- Do not contaminatewater,food,orfeedbyimproperstorageordisposal.
PesticideStorage:Keepfromfreezing.Storeinoriginalcontaineronly.
tions.Before buying or using this product,readWarrantyDisclaimerand Do not store near feed or foodstuffs. In case of leak or spill, use absorbent
Misuse statements inside label booklet. If terms are unacceptable, return materials to contain liquids and dispose as waste.
at once unopened. Pesticide Disposal:Wastes resulting from use of this product may be used
according to label directions or disposed ofatanapprovedwastedisposal
EPAReg. No. 67690-55 facility.
Container Handling
EPA Est.No.067690-NC-002 Non-reĳllable Container.DONOT reuse or reĳllthiscontainer. Triple
FPL20251201-ESP rinseorpressurerinsecontainer(orequivalent)promptlyafteremptying;then
161008 offer for recycling,ifavailable, or reconditioning,ifappropriate, or puncture
2023-05-15 and dispose of in a sanitary landfill, or by incineration, or by other procedures
approved bystate and local authorities.
AMaximum See attached booklet for complete container disposal directions
SEPRO Corporation Use Level of 24 including triple rinsing and pressure rinsing instructions.
11550 N. Meridian Street, Suite600, mg/L is required
Carmel, IN46032,U.S.A. fortheproduct. Net contents: 2.5 gallon (Non-reĳllable)
EREHMLIFLEEP