Oregon DEQ
Freshwater
Cyanobacteria Harmful
Algal Blooms Strategy
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 1
This document was prepared by
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality
Watershed Management Section
700 NE Multnomah Street, Portland Oregon, 97232
Version 2.1
October 2023
Contact: Daniel Sobota
Phone: 503-229-5138
www.oregon.gov/deq
Acknowledgements: Oregon DEQ HABs Coordination Team and the Oregon Health Authority
Translation or other formats
Español | 한국어 | 繁體中文 | Pусский | Tiếng Việt | ﺔﯾﺑرﻌﻟا
800-452-4011 | TTY: 711 | deqinfo@deq.oregon.gov
Non-discrimination statement
DEQ does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, disability, age or sex in administration
of its programs or activities. Visit DEQ’s Civil Rights and Environmental Justice page.
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 2
List of Acronyms
Acronym Title
BEACH Beach Environmental Assessment Communication and Health
BMP Best Management Practices
CWA Clean Water Act
CyanoHAB Cyanobacteria harmful algal bloom
DEQ Department of Environmental Quality
DWP Drinking Water Protection
DWS Drinking Water Services
DMAs Designated Management Agencies
EP Entry Point
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
EQC Environmental Quality Commission
FIFRA Federal Insecticide Fungicide and Rodenticide Act
FPA Forest Practices Act
FTE Full Time Equivalence
GIS Geographical Information Systems
HCB Harmful Cyanobacterial Bloom
IMD Internal Management Directive
LA Load Allocation
LEAD Laboratory Environmental Assessment Division
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NPS Nonpoint Source
OAR Oregon Administrative Rule
ODA Oregon Department of Agriculture
ODF Oregon Department of Forestry
ODFW Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife
OHA Oregon Health Authority
OWEB Oregon Watershed Enhancement Board
PWS Public Water System
QAPP Quality Assurance Project Plan
RP Responsible Person
RUV Recreational Use Value
SAP Sampling Analysis Plan
SRF State Revolving Fund
SWA Source Water Assessment
TMDL Total Maximum Daily Load
USACE U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
USFS U.S. Forest Service
WLA Waste Load Allocation
WMS Watershed Management Section
WQA Water Quality Assessment
WQP Water Quality Permits
WQS Water Quality Standards
WPCF Water Pollution Control Facilities
WQMP Water Quality Management Plan
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 3
Table of contents
List of Tables ....................................................................................................... 6
List of Figures ..................................................................................................... 6
Overview and purpose ........................................................................................ 7
Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms ...................................................................... 7
CyanoHABs in Oregon................................................................................................................ 7
Goals and objectives................................................................................................................... 8
Purpose ....................................................................................................................................... 8
DEQ Freshwater CyanoHAB Strategy components ................................................................... 9
Drinking Water CyanoHABs: Monitoring and Public Health Response ....... 10
Starting point: Evaluate drinking water sources susceptible to cyanotoxins ............................ 11
Decision point: Determine susceptibility ................................................................................... 11
Raw water sampling at intake (biweekly).................................................................................. 12
Decision point: Are cyanotoxins in raw water above action level? ........................................... 12
Decision point: Are cyanotoxins in finished water above health advisory levels? .................... 13
Technical assistance................................................................................................................. 14
Recreational Freshwater CyanoHABs: Public Health Response .................. 18
Starting point: Surveillance program for CyanoHABs ............................................................... 19
Decision point: Pre-emptive advisory/recommend sampling .................................................... 20
Issuing and lifting recreational use advisories .......................................................................... 20
Additional technical support from DEQ ..................................................................................... 21
Clean Water Act Freshwater CyanoHABs: Assessment and Actions .......... 25
Starting point: Assessment for beneficial use support .............................................................. 27
Data for Integrated Report cycle ............................................................................................... 27
Comparison with assessment methodology ............................................................................. 27
Decision point: Is the waterbody impaired by CyanoHABs? .................................................... 28
Evaluation for TMDL development / Alternative Plan ............................................................... 29
Decision point: Is a TMDL/Alternative plan needed? ................................................................ 29
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 4
Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) .......................................................................................... 29
Category 4B Alternative Plans .................................................................................................. 30
Water Quality Management Plan .............................................................................................. 31
Decision point: Do permits meet TMDL/Alternative Plan?........................................................ 31
Permit development and issuance ............................................................................................ 31
Permit meets wasteload allocations ......................................................................................... 32
TMDL/Alternative Plan implementation .................................................................................... 32
TMDL/Alternative Plan Effectiveness Monitoring ..................................................................... 32
Decision Point: Are TMDL/Alternative Plan goals met? ........................................................... 33
Synthesis and recommendations .................................................................... 36
Climate Change ........................................................................................................................ 36
Environmental Justice ............................................................................................................... 37
Funding ..................................................................................................................................... 37
Conclusions .............................................................................................................................. 39
Appendix A: Marine HABs ................................................................................ 40
References ......................................................................................................... 42
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 5
List of Tables
Table 1. Health advisory thresholds for cyanotoxins in finished drinking water established by
OHA. ........................................................................................................................................................... 13
Table 2. Specific actions and subprograms identified as currently part of or needed for
addressing drinking water related issues related to CyanoHABs in Oregon freshwaters. ........... 15
Table 3. RUV thresholds for triggering a health advisory in Oregon. ............................................... 20
Table 4. Specific activities and subprograms identified as currently active or needed for
addressing recreational use issues related to CyanoHABs in Oregon freshwaters. ..................... 23
Table 5. Specific activities and subprograms identified as currently active or needed for
addressing Clean Water Act issues related to CyanoHABs in Oregon waterbodies..................... 34
List of Figures
Figure 1. Workflow and accountability diagram for DEQ and partners describing monitoring of
and response to CyanoHABs in Oregon’s drinking water sources. ................................................. 11
Figure 2. Workflow and accountability diagram for DEQ and partners describing the roles and
responsibilities for responding to CyanoHABs in Oregon's recreational waterbodies. ................. 19
Figure 3. Workflow and accountability diagram for DEQ and partners describing the roles and
responsibilities for assessing and managing CyanoHABs under the Clean Water Act. ............... 26
Figure 4. Schematic of Oregon coastal shellfish advisories by year from 2007-2017. ................. 41
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 6
Overview and purpose
Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms
Microscopic freshwater organisms that perform photosynthesis, otherwise known as algae,
provide important food resources for aquatic food webs in lakes, reservoirs, streams, and rivers.
However, under certain conditions, algal populations can grow at an accelerated rate and result
in a “bloom.” In some cases, these algal blooms can create harmful conditions by degrading
water quality, producing toxins dangerous to humans and animals, or a combination of both.
Harmful blooms of a particular type of aquatic bacteria that has been historically grouped with
algae-cyanobacteria-pose specific threats to water quality and human health in freshwater
ecosystems. Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs; also referred to as HCBs) can
impair water quality by degrading pH and dissolved oxygen conditions and produce a class of
compounds known as cyanotoxins. Cyanotoxins threaten humans, wildlife, livestock, and
fisheries because these compounds can cause a variety of sicknesses, and possibly death,
from exposure or ingestion. The frequency, extent, and magnitude of CyanoHABs in
waterbodies can respond to a variety of individual and combinations of factors, including
changes in water temperature, nutrient loading, and hydrologic conditions within watersheds.
This document focuses on freshwater CyanoHABs and does not address harmful algal blooms
that occur in estuarine and marine environments. However, concepts and actions identified in
this document could eventually be used to address blooms in these waters. Appendix A: Marine
HABs provides background on cyanobacteria and other types of harmful algal blooms in
estuarine and marine ecosystems.
CyanoHABs in Oregon
Public concern over freshwater CyanoHABs has increased in Oregon since the early 2000s.
From 2007 to 2023, 189 recreational advisories were issued by the Oregon Health Authority
(OHA) for elevated cyanotoxins in waterbodies across the state (Oregon Health Authority,
Cyanobacteria Advisory Archive, 2022). In 2018, a CyanoHAB in Detroit Reservoir caused the
city of Salem to issue a “Do Not Drink” advisory for vulnerable populations (the young, elderly,
and immunocompromised) due to elevated cyanotoxins in finished drinking water.
In 2010, the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) started to include waters with
documented CyanoHABs on its list of impaired waters, as required under Section 303(d) the
Clean Water Act (US EPA, Clean Water Act Section 303(d): Impaired Waters and Total
Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs), 2021)). These waterbodies do not meet water quality
standards and thus do not support designated beneficial uses (drinking water, recreation, or
agricultural/livestock use). The listing of a waterbody as impaired by a CyanoHAB requires DEQ
to determine the cause(s) and establish a plan known as a Total Maximum Daily Load, or
TMDL, for meeting water quality standards. At the time of the development of this strategy, the
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 7
current EPA-Approved 2022 Integrated Report lists 53 waterbodies as water quality impaired by
CyanoHABs (Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, 2022 Final Integrated Report,
2022). Seven of the 53 waterbodies have established TMDLs for addressing CyanoHABs
(Category 4A) and one has a Category 4B Alternative Plan in place.
The 2023 DEQ CyanoHAB strategy described here documents DEQ’s actions to support the
statewide monitoring, response, assessment, and management of CyanoHABs in Oregon. This
strategy provides significant updates to the DEQ HABs strategy presented in 2011 (Oregon
Department of Environmental Quality, Oregon DEQ Harmful Algal Bloom (HAB) Strategy, 2011).
Recommendations in the 2023 strategy support continued implementation of several of the
actions proposed in 2011 and identifies additional needs to support and expand current
operations. Recommendations described in the strategy may require additional funding from
state, federal, or other applicable sources.
Goals and objectives
The goal of this strategy is to outline the approach DEQ takes to detect, monitor, assess, and
manage CyanoHABs as an agency and in coordination with partner agencies and interested
parties. In the process of working toward this goal, we have identified gaps and have developed
recommendations to improve and expand the DEQ CyanoHABs strategy.
Objectives of this strategy include:
• Describe the specific ways in which DEQ works with OHA and other state, federal, and
external partners to detect, monitor, and manage CyanoHABs in drinking water sources
and recreational waterbodies
• Describe the process by which DEQ identifies, lists, examines, monitors, and manages
CyanoHABs within the framework of the Clean Water Act
• Provide decision points, process steps, data needs, and flow diagrams for how different
subprograms work on CyanoHABs within DEQ
• Identify and quantify DEQ resources used on efforts to address CyanoHABs in Oregon
Purpose
The purpose of DEQ’s CyanoHAB Strategy is to protect public health and the environment. The
primary audience for this 2023 strategy is the State of Oregon and DEQ management and staff
and is intended to function as an operational manual. However, the strategy can also be used
by other government agencies and the public to understand decision points, processes, and
responsible programs in the various components of the strategy. The overall effort to address
CyanoHABs involves a broad partnership of federal, state, and local partners. Implementation of
statewide actions to address CyanoHABs requires strong collaborations among all partners.
This strategy document does not contain in-depth background information, current areas of
research, or policy positions on CyanoHABs. Background and policy information can be
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 8
accessed from the 2011 DEQ HABs strategy (Oregon Department of Environmental Quality,
Oregon DEQ Harmful Algal Bloom (HAB) Strategy, 2011), from the US EPA’s CyanoHABs
website (US EPA, Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) in Water Bodies, 2023),
and the Interstate Technology Regulatory Council’s Harmful Cyanobacteria Bloom website
(Interstate Technology Regulatory Council, 2022).
DEQ Freshwater CyanoHAB Strategy components
DEQ’s strategy for addressing Freshwater CyanoHABs includes three main components:
• Drinking Water CyanoHABs: Monitoring and Public Health Response
• Recreational Freshwater CyanoHABs: Public Health Response
• Clean Water Act Freshwater CyanoHABs: Assessment and Actions
Detailed schematics and explanations of the collaborative process among DEQ, OHA, and other
local, state, and federal partners can be accessed through the links above. For two of these
components - drinking water and recreational use advisories - DEQ coordinates with OHA to
monitor, sample, and analyze water quality samples for cyanotoxins. OHA issues and lifts public
drinking water and recreational use advisories for freshwater CyanoHABs. OHA maintains a
drinking water and recreational website that shows these advisories and links to other general
information regarding CyanoHABs (Oregon Health Authority, Oregon Drinking Water Services,
2022; Oregon Health Authority, Cyanobacteria Blooms, 2022). DEQ maintains a list of
waterbodies impaired by CyanoHABs that can be accessed from the Water Quality Assessment
Integrated Report website (Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, 2022 Final Integrated
Report, 2022).
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 9
Drinking Water CyanoHABs:
Monitoring and Public Health
Response
This section describes the ways in which DEQ works with the OHA Drinking Water Services
(DWS) and other partners to address CyanoHABs in Public Drinking Water Systems (PWSs).
Under an interagency agreement, the TMDL and Drinking Water Protection (DWP) programs
and LEAD provide technical assistance and laboratory analysis to OHA DWS and as part of
voluntary actions by PWSs. These administrative rules comprise Oregon’s directives for
cyanotoxin monitoring that apply to select PWSs and establish minimum requirements for
monitoring and public notification. The Drinking Water CyanoHABs figure below highlights the
roles and responsibilities each agency and partners have for monitoring and public health
response. Details for each of the schematic components are described subsequently. Table 2
describes specific activities and subprograms currently active or needed for addressing drinking
water issues related to CyanoHABs in Oregon freshwaters.
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 10
Drinking Water CyanoHABs: Monitoring and public health response
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 11
SWD
AHO
SWP
DAEL QED
PWD/LDMT
QED
Workflow and accountability diagram
Either resume biweekly
No: after two raw water sampling or
E s v u w a s l a u ce t a e p t r e t i s b d o i r l u i i n t r y c k e i t n o g No further action N R o et : u c r o n n t t i o n b ue iw b e i e w k e ly e k s l a y m sa p m lin p g l in af g t e o r r Recrea I t n i p f o o r n o r a m g l r C a O y m H an A o HABs consecutive non-detects c f o in n i t s in h u ed e w w e at e e k r ly s a ra m w p a le n s d cyanotoxins two consecutive weeks < action levels
Confirmation
su D s e c t e e p r t m ib in ili e t y No c R y a r a w e n s o w u t l a o ts t x e in r le C v y e l a l e s n v ≥ o e t l a s o c ? x t i i n o n Yes E cy n r a t e r n y s o u p t l o o ts x in in t e C d n y e a t t r n e y o c p t t e o o d x in i a n t t ? s Yes h s e a 2 a m 4 lt p h h l e o a u d w r v i s i t s h > o i r n y
Confirmation levels
sample within
24 hours ≤
Yes health advisory
Yes levels
m d o V e n o t i l e t u o r n m r t i a n in r g y e t o Yes dr s R i a n a m k i w n i p n t w a g lin k a w e g t a e a t r t e r wee A k s d l a y d m r it a p i w o lin n w g al a ter d s o a a E y n m n e a t p n r b l y e d u p s w w i o n i e i t e n e h s t k i s n l y e s C n a 2 o t m 4 r n y p f h i p l r o e m o u w in r a s i t t t i a h a o t n i n n d P N w u o b it t l h i D c in r n i 2 n o 4 k ti c h O e o r / d u D e rs r o Pu D b o lic N O n o r o d t t e D ic r r e i / n k L ift
susceptibility (biweekly) thereafter daily thereafer
dr s s C i a n u o s m s k o o c i r p u n e d g l r p i i c n n t w e i g a b s a t o l e t e f e r C a y t a a D n c ( c o o E r r Q t e o e d x l x a i i t t n b e e o d r a r n n l a a a a t l b o l y ) r s y is C a y t a a D n c ( c o o E r r Q t e o e d x l x a i i t t n b e e o d r a r n n l a a a a t l b o l y ) r s y is
s a u s d T s s e e i c s t c e t e h p a r n n m ti i c b c i e n i a l e i l t t o y T fo e c r c o h in m n f i o m c r a u m l n a a s i t c s i a o is t n t io a a n n n c d e
Key: Start/End Decision Data Process Subprocess Document
Figure 1. Workflow and accountability diagram for DEQ and partners describing monitoring of
and response to CyanoHABs in Oregon’s drinking water sources.
Starting point: Evaluate drinking water sources
susceptible to cyanotoxins
Decision point: Determine susceptibility
OHA DWS decides if a drinking water source is susceptible to contamination by cyanotoxins
with technical assistance from the TMDL and DWP programs. A drinking water source is
considered susceptible to cyanotoxins if it uses a surface water source that:
• has had a documented CyanoHAB or cyanotoxin detection in the past
• is downstream from a waterbody with past CyanoHAB or cyanotoxin detections
• is determined to be susceptible to cyanotoxins as determined by WSA in the Integrated
Report (algae and aquatic weeds)
Susceptible drinking water sources can also be identified based on the characteristics of the
source (e.g., slow-moving or stagnant water, temperature, excess nutrient loading, water quality
data, satellite imagery, presence of microcystin- or cylindrospermopsin-producing genes, or
other relevant information).
Additionally, a PWS is considered susceptible and subject to OARs 333-061-0510 to 333-061-
0580 if a PWS purchases and supplies water from a source deemed susceptible according to
the criteria described above.
OHA DWS can approve voluntary cyanotoxin monitoring upon request by PWS if factors in the
watershed indicate potential susceptibility (i.e., a potential bloom in an upstream waterbody). If
cyanotoxins are detected, the drinking water source meets the definition of susceptible and the
public water system them becomes are subject to the cyanotoxin rules (OARs 333-061-0510 to
333-061-0580).
The DWP and OHA DWS have created Source Water Assessments for most PWSs in Oregon
(Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, About Drinking Water Protection, 2023). Using
these and other resources, DEQ provides technical support to OHA for the identification and
confirmation of susceptible drinking water sources.
If a drinking water source is deemed susceptible, OHA DWS coordinates with the DEQ
Laboratory and Environmental Assessment Division (LEAD) on communicating and scheduling
seasonal (May – October) biweekly sampling of cyanotoxin levels in raw water from the source
by the PWS. If deemed not susceptible, no further actions or sampling are required. However,
the PWS may sample raw water voluntarily. The flowchart OHA DWS uses for sampling and
decision points for susceptible water sources is consistent with the flow diagram presented in
this section (Oregon Health Authority, Cyanotoxin Monitoring Requirements For Sources
Determined to be Susceptible, 2023).
Raw water sampling at intake (biweekly)
PWSs deemed as susceptible to CyanoHAB by OHA DWS must sample raw water every two
weeks from May 1 to October 31 each year or until the system is no longer considered
susceptible. Cyanotoxin samples must be analyzed at a laboratory accredited by the Oregon
Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Program or by LEAD (which most PWS currently use).
The DEQ Harmful Algal Blooms: Drinking Water Cyanotoxin Monitoring page has guidance for
water systems needing to sample (Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, Harmful Algal
Blooms: Drinking Water Cyanotoxin Monitoring, 2023).
Decision point: Are cyanotoxins in raw water above
action level?
Biweekly sampling of cyanotoxins in raw water continue from May 1 to October 31 for
susceptible PWS unless concentrations of total microcystins ≥ 0.20 µg/L or cylindrospermopsin
≥ 0.30 µg/L. Upon detection of total microcystins ≥ 0.20 µg/L or cylindrospermopsin ≥ 0.30 µg/L
in raw water:
• The PWS must immediately increase raw water monitoring to weekly and sample
finished water within one business day and weekly thereafter. If cyanotoxins are
detected in finished water, finished water must be sampled daily.
• Exceeding a health advisory level in a sample collected from an entry point or a
distribution sampling point requires additional monitoring and public notification (OAR
333-061-0540 and OAR 333-061-0570).
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 12
• The OHA Recreational HABs program must be notified to determine if a recreational
advisory is needed.
If total microcystins are < 0.20 µg/L or non-detect and cylindrospermopsin are < 0.30 µg/L or
non-detect in two consecutive weeks of raw water sampling and there is no upstream
recreational CyanoHABs advisory, sampling of raw water returns to biweekly intervals at the
PWS.
Decision point: Are cyanotoxins in finished water
above health advisory levels?
Following the first detection of total microcystins ≥ 0.20 µg/L or cylindrospermopsin ≥ 0.30 µg/L
in raw water, a sample from the entry point of the finished drinking water entering the
distribution system must be taken within one business day. If two consecutive samples of
finished water from the entry point and two consecutive raw water samples have total
microcystins < 0.20 µg/L or non-detect and cylindrospermopsin < 0.30 µg/L or non-detect, then
the sampling schedule returns to biweekly sampling of raw water at the PWS intake (OAR 333-
061-0510).
OHA DWS has implemented health advisory levels for cyanotoxins in finished drinking water
established by the EPA (Table 1).
Table 1. Health advisory thresholds for cyanotoxins in finished drinking water established by
OHA.
Cyanotoxin Vulnerable People For Everyone
(µg/L or ppb) (µg/L or ppb)
Total Microcystins 0.3 1.6
Cylindrospermopsin 0.7 3
If a sample from finished drinking water at the entry has detectable levels of cyanotoxins,
regardless of concentration level, a sample must be taken within 24 hours and sampling at the
entry point must be conducted daily. If a cyanotoxin concentration is confirmed to exceed the
levels listed in Table 1, the PWS and any purchasing distributor must issue a “Do-Not-Drink”
order for that source within 24 hours (for the water system and any purchaser) and sampling of
finished water at the entry point of the distribution system continues daily thereafter. In order to
lift the order, two consecutive water samples from finished water and the distribution system
must be at or below the health advisory levels for vulnerable people, defined as children
younger than six, pregnant women, the elderly, and those with pre-existing conditions (Table 1).
Once an order is lifted, the PWS must monitoring for the rest of the year according to rule
requirements.
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 13
Technical assistance
The TMDL and DWP programs can provide both OHA DWS and PWSs technical assistance in
determining system susceptibility to CyanoHABs, interpretation of cyanotoxin monitoring results,
and communication of cyanotoxin results to the general public. The DWP program for SWA
maintains information on CyanoHABs on its program website (Oregon Department of
Environmental Quality, About Drinking Water Protection, 2023).
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 14
Table 2. Specific actions and subprograms identified as currently part of or needed for addressing drinking water related issues
related to CyanoHABs in Oregon freshwaters.
DEQ Program(s) Action/subprogram Currently Recommendation(s)
active?
LEAD/DWP/TMDL Develop and implement a joint DEQ/OHA strategy to Yes Continue with updates
identify PWSs susceptible to CyanoHABs and provide as needed
technical assistance for testing, treatment alternatives,
and protection
DWP Partnership between OHA and DEQ to ensure Yes Continue
consistent evaluation of cyanotoxin contamination risks
for PWS
DWP Conduct source assessments of PWSs for potential Yes Continue with updates
contaminants, including cyanotoxins, using water as needed
quality data, remote sensing, and landscape models
DWP/TMDL Provide protection assistance and grant support to Yes Continue
PWSs identified as susceptible to CyanoHABs
TMDL Develop a nutrient strategy to assess sources of and Yes Continue and expand as
reduction strategies for nutrient loading to watersheds resources allow
and surface waters
DWP Assess susceptibility of unregulated domestic drinking No Implement as resources
water sources to CyanoHABs allow
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 15
DEQ Program(s) Action/subprogram Currently Recommendation(s)
active?
DWP/TMDL Provide technical assistance and grant support to areas No Implement as resources
with domestic drinking water sources susceptible to allow
CyanoHABs
TMDL Enact pollution reduction strategies in areas susceptible Yes Continue and expand as
to CyanoHABs for both public and private domestic resources allow
water sources
DWP Recommend to local authorities and OHA potential No Implement as resources
restrictions on public and domestic drinking water and priorities allow
sources affected by frequent CyanoHABs
DWP Leverage resources, share water quality and GIS data Yes Continue with updates
analyses, and assist other programs related to as needed
CyanoHAB-susceptible drinking water sources
TMDL/DWP Conduct source assessments of potential factors Yes Continue and expand as
contributing to CyanoHABs in PWSs to develop resources and
statewide policy and drinking water protection competing TMDL
strategies priorities allow
LEAD/TMDL Collect monitoring data to assess the susceptibility of Yes Continue and expand as
PWSs to CyanoHABs resources allow
TMDL Issue TMDLs for PWS contaminated by CyanoHABs No As competing TMDL
priorities allow
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 16
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 17
Recreational Freshwater
CyanoHABs: Public Health Response
This section describes how DEQ works with OHA and other partners to address CyanoHABs in
recreational waterbodies. The OHA Recreational HABs program is responsible for issuing,
lifting, and communicating about public health advisories for cyanotoxins in recreational
waterbodies. DEQ is an active partner tasked with cyanotoxin monitoring and water sampling
and, independently, can investigate CyanoHABs in recreational waterbodies for Clean Water
Act purposes. DEQ provides satellite imagery, coordinates monitoring internally and with OHA
and external partners, and conducts laboratory analyses for cyanotoxins according to accredited
methods. If there is not a clearly identified partner for water quality monitoring, DEQ may
provide monitoring staff to collect, preserve, and transport samples. An interagency agreement
between OHA and DEQ has been developed to define and partially fund joint OHA-DEQ
activity. The Recreational Freshwater CyanoHABs figure highlights the roles each agency and
external partners occupy for monitoring and public health responses. Details for each of the
schematic components are described subsequently. Table 4 describes specific activities and
subprograms currently active or needed for addressing recreational use issues related to
CyanoHABs in Oregon freshwaters.
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 18
Recreational Freshwater CyanoHABs: Public Health Response
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 19
sBAH lanoitaerceR
AHO
DAEL
QED
snoigeR
QED
srentrap
lanretxE
LDMT
QED
Workflow and accountability diagram
No further Do not issue/
Surveil C la y n a c n e o p H r A o B g s ram for ac N ti o on Pr a e d -e v m iso p r t y ive lift a N dv o isory Dr C in y I a k n i n n f o o g H r W m A B at s e r
Program
Re a c b e o C i u v y t e a a i n n p o f o o H t r A m e B n a t t ia io l n P re s r a e a c d o m - v e m i p m s m l o i p n r e t y g i n / v ? d e Yes Yes: sample weekly C ab ya o n v o e t R o U xi V n ? s Yes U Re se cr A e d at v i i o so n r a y l
RUV cyanotoxin RUV
sampling and cyanotoxin
analysis results
Local RUV cyanotoxin
observations Yes sampling
Laboratory
obse L r o v c a a t l i ons Yes RUV s a c m ya p n li o n t g oxin a a m c n s c e t a r a e l e n y t d s s d i i s t a s a t r t t d a h i t s o a e n t
Weekly Recommend pre-
satellite emptive advisory/
imagery sampling?
No
No further
action
Key: Start/End Decision Data Process Subprocess Document
Figure 2. Workflow and accountability diagram for DEQ and partners describing the roles and
responsibilities for responding to CyanoHABs in Oregon's recreational waterbodies.
Starting point: Surveillance program for CyanoHABs
To support decisions for public health advisories in recreational waterbodies, OHA operates a
recreational HABs program. The program provides resources for partner agencies, waterbody
managers, and the public to evaluate and monitor for CyanoHABs. Based on guidance provided
by these documents, EPA, the Interstate Technological Regulatory Council, external partners
such as federal agencies, lake managers, the general public, regional DEQ staff, and staff from
the TMDL program provide OHA with information and recommendations about potential
CyanoHABs in waterbodies across the state. OHA consults with DEQ staff and regional
partners about issuing a pre-emptive advisory based on visual observations and recreational
use level. OHA also consults with LEAD about the need for sampling to determine cyanotoxin
levels.
Decision point: Pre-emptive advisory/recommend
sampling
OHA may issue a pre-emptive recreational use health advisory when:
1. Visible scum with supporting photographs and cyanotoxin analysis will be performed
within one business day. Scum is defined as a visible mass of cyanobacteria identified in
the water body; or
2. Submitted samples by external partners or DEQ are above OHA’s Recreational Use
Values (RUVs) (Table 3).
Table 3. RUV thresholds for triggering a health advisory in Oregon.
Cyanotoxin Microcystin Anatoxin-a Saxitoxin Cylindrospermopsin
RUV (µg/L) 8 15 8 15
The DEQ Watershed Management Section may recommend a pre-emptive advisory and
additional sampling to OHA based on analysis of information provided by DEQ regions and/or
external partners, including, but not limited to, satellite imagery, visual observations of “scum”,
water quality samples for cyanotoxins, or other information describing cyanobacteria
communities. If a pre-emptive advisory is not issued by OHA, the TMDL program may still
request additional samples be taken by LEAD or external partners funded through the TMDL or
NPS programs.
Issuing and lifting recreational use advisories
An interagency agreement between OHA and DEQ has been developed to define and partially
fund joint OHA-DEQ activity. If requested by OHA, the DEQ laboratory may conduct laboratory
analysis for cyanotoxins of water quality samples submitted by external partners or may
conducted water quality sampling and laboratory analysis for cyanotoxins when external
partners have not been identified. LEAD may provide monitoring staff to collect, preserve, and
transport samples.
External partners, including OHA defined partners, federal agencies, other state agencies, local
governments, and the public, may conduct independent observations and sampling for potential
CyanoHABs. These partners may consult, but are not required to, with DEQ and OHA on
designing and implementing a monitoring study to assess cyanotoxins in relation to RUVs and
may report potential CyanoHABs to DEQ and OHA.
LEAD conducts analyses for cyanotoxins using accredited methods according to OAR Chapter
333 Division 64. External partners are required to sample and analyze samples using the same
accredited methods. External Partners contract with laboratories accredited according to the
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 20
OHA approved list of laboratories for recreational and drinking water sampling or LEAD to
perform the required analyses (Oregon Health Authority, Cyanobacteria Blooms, 2022).
If the subsequent cyanotoxin sample collected within one business day is below all RUVs, OHA
will lift the pre-emptive advisory. However, if cyanotoxins levels are above one or more
cyanotoxins RUVs (Table 3), LEAD or an external partner informs OHA immediately and a
recreational use advisory is issued. Weekly sampling of cyanotoxins then commences. OHA lifts
the advisory when two consecutive samples fall below the RUVs.
Additional technical support from DEQ
The TMDL program provides routine seasonal technical support to OHA and other federal,
regional, and local partners for the identification and analysis of potential CyanoHABs in
recreational waterbodies. General support includes expert consultation, analysis of water quality
data, modeling, and interpretation of field and remotely sensed data.
The TMDL program has worked with the EPA and NASA to compile weekly imagery of
cyanobacteria abundance in large (>1 km2) Oregon waterbodies. Images are compiled weekly
from May to October and compiled on an interactive website (Oregon Department of
Environmental Quality, Satellite Estimates of Cyanobacteria in Oregon Lakes and Reservoirs,
2023). Weekly emails are distributed to DEQ regional staff, OHA, and external partners.
Additional satellite imagery and images from other sources may be included on the website in
the future.
When specific waterbodies show potential CyanoHABs formation based on satellite imagery or
other information, the TMDL program follows up with DEQ regional contacts and OHA
recommended actions, including the issuance of a pre-emptive advisory and cyanotoxin
sampling.
DEQ regional staff may be available to support CyanoHAB monitoring in recreational
waterbodies through on-site observations, feedback from the public, and examination of satellite
imagery. Historically, LEAD has supplied regional staff with CyanoHABs sampling kits in
advance of CyanoHABs season.
Regional staff must be notified by OHA or LEAD in a timely manner if a potential CyanoHAB is
reported within their basin of responsibility from external partners or internal agency sampling.
If LEAD will conduct cyanotoxin sampling at the request of OHA, it must notify the appropriate
staff from the region and TMDL program prior to sampling and report field conditions at time of
sampling and sample results.
When a local partner cannot be identified for addressing a potential CyanoHABs, DEQ regional
staff may assume the local partner role upon request. Upon identification of a potential
CyanoHABs through observations of visible scum or other evidence, regional staff may
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 21
coordinate with OHA, LEAD, or the TMDL program to conduct additional investigations or
sampling. They are also available to aid in cyanotoxin sampling and field observations as
requested by LEAD or OHA.
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 22
Table 4. Specific activities and subprograms identified as currently active or needed for addressing recreational use issues related to
CyanoHABs in Oregon freshwaters.
DEQ Programs Activity/subprogram Currently Active? Recommendation(s)
LEAD Participation in CyanoHAB monitoring program with OHA Continue and expand as
Yes
and other local partners resources allow
LEAD Work with OHA to review and refine monitoring methods Continue and update as
Yes
for cyanotoxins needed
LEAD/TMDL Partner with OHA, Oregon State University, and other
groups to host an annual stakeholder meeting to review Yes Continue
and discuss CyanoHABs
LEAD/TMDL/Regions Maintain a DEQ CyanoHAB response team for responding Continue and expand as
Yes
to CyanoHAB events reported by agencies or the public resources allow
LEAD/TMDL Conduct annual review following CyanoHABs monitoring
Yes Continue
season for process improvements and data maintenance
TMDL Develop a DEQ CyanoHABs website to provide access to
the CyanoHAB strategy, Satellite analysis, other DEQ
Yes Continue and update
CyanoHAB related info, links, and other available
information
LEAD/TMDL Develop Memorandum of Agreements among state agency
partners to better define roles and responsibilities for Partially Yes Expand beyond OHA
addressing CyanoHABs
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 23
DEQ Programs Activity/subprogram Currently Active? Recommendation(s)
LEAD/TMDL Incorporate genetic sampling, satellite analyses, and water
Continue and expand as
quality modeling for proactive issuance of recreational Yes
resources allow
advisories
LEAD/DWP/TMDL/ Form Oregon CyanoHABs Task Group (state, federal, local
Regions agencies, academics) to discuss, plan, develop and
Continue, update, and
coordinate actions in Oregon to improve multi-agency Partially Yes
expand as resources allow
response to CyanoHABs and ultimately prevent and control
CyanoHABs
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 24
Clean Water Act Freshwater
CyanoHABs: Assessment and
Actions
This section describes how DEQ identifies, assesses, and determines appropriate actions for
protecting and restoring Oregon waterbodies impaired by CyanoHABs. DEQ is responsible for
implementing and managing the Clean Water Act in Oregon. Figure 3 highlights the roles each
DEQ water quality subprogram and external partners have for identifying, developing, and
implementing the actions. The process starts with the assessment for beneficial use supported
and ultimately ends with the implementation of actions to restore beneficial uses through a
TMDL or an alternative plan. As of the 2022 Integrated Report cycle, seven waterbodies have
approved TMDLs for CyanoHABs (Category 4A) and one has an approved Alternative Plan
(category 4B) (Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, 2022 Final Integrated Report,
2022). Table 5 describes specific activities and subprograms currently active or needed for
addressing Clean Water Act issues related to CyanoHABs in Oregon waterbodies.
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 25
Clean Water Act Freshwater CyanoHABs: Assessment and Management Actions
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 26
/seitilicaf/sAMD
AQW
QED
LDMT
QED
DAEL
QED
snoigeR
QED
PQW
QED
snosrep
elbisnopser
Workflow and accountability diagram
Do not include
No on Category 5
303(d) list
Data for
Assessment for integrated Comparison Waterbody Category 4A or
beneficial use report with assessment impaired for 4B on 303(d) list
support methodology CyanoHABs?
cycle
No Category 5 list
Yes on 303(d) report
Yes
No
Evaluation for
TMDL or TMDL/ TMDL/ Are TMDL/
TMDL/ Alternative Plan yes Alternative Plan Data and Alternative Plan Alternative Plan Alternative Plan needed? development models goals met?
development
Data
Monitoring
projects Alternative Plan
effectiveness
monitoring
Water Quality
Local Management
information Plan /
Alternative Plan
Permit Do permits meet
development No TMDL/Alternative
and issuance Plan?
Yes
TMDL/
TMDL / Alternative Alternative Plan Data
Plan Implementation effectiveness
monitoring
Key: Start/End Decision Data Process Subprocess Document
Figure 3. Workflow and accountability diagram for DEQ and partners describing the roles and
responsibilities for assessing and managing CyanoHABs under the Clean Water Act.
Starting point: Assessment for beneficial use support
DEQ must assess water quality for beneficial use support and report to EPA on the condition of
Oregon's waters. Every two years, the Water Quality Assessment Program (WQA) prepares an
Integrated Report to meet the requirements of Federal Clean Water Act Sections 305(b) and
303(d). The report cycle begins with a public call for data.
Data for Integrated Report cycle
CyanoHABs monitoring data and CyanoHABs advisory information are evaluated every two
years to assemble the Integrated Report. Data may come from:
• DEQ’s Ambient Water Quality Monitoring System
• EPA's Water Quality Portal
• DEQ’s Volunteer Monitoring Program
• OHA public health drinking water advisories list.
• OHA public health recreational advisories issued and lifted throughout the season for
monitored and sampled water bodies.
Comparison with assessment methodology
CyanoHABs monitoring data and advisory information compiled during the Integrated Report
cycle call for data are assessed using DEQ’s most current Integrated Report assessment
methodology. Based on the current data window defined in the methodology, a waterbody may
be classified into the following assessment categories for CyanoHABs:
• Category 2: Available data and information indicate that some designated uses are
supported and the water quality standard is attained.
• Category 3: Insufficient data to determine whether a designated use is supported.
Oregon further subclassifies Category 3 as:
3B: Insufficient to determine use support but some data indicate non-attainment
o
of a criterion
3C: Potential concern when data are insufficient to determine full use support
o
3D: Insufficient data to determine use support because numeric criteria are less
o
than quantitation limits.
• Category 4: Data indicate that at least one designated use is not supported but a TMDL
is not needed to address the pollutant cause. This includes:
4A: TMDLs that will result in attainment of water quality standards and beneficial
o
use support have been approved.
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 27
4B: Other pollution control requirements are expected to address pollutants and
o
will result in attainment of water quality standards.
4C: Impairment caused by pollution, not by a pollutant (e.g., flow or lack of flow
o
are not considered pollutants).
• Category 5: Data indicate a designated use is not supported or a water quality standard
is not attained and a TMDL or Alternative Plan is needed. This category constitutes the
Section 303(d) list that EPA will approve or disapprove under the Clean Water Act.
Decision point: Is the waterbody impaired by
CyanoHABs?
To be placed on the Category 5 list as impaired by CyanoHABs, a waterbody must have had a
public health advisory issued by OHA, in conjunction with other federal, state, county, city or
local agencies, within the data window which:
• is a permanent advisory
• has reoccurred for two or more HABs seasons
• only occurred once but had cyanotoxin values above OHA guidelines for water contact
recreation (Table 3)
• finished water exceeds the advisory for vulnerable people AND where the waterbody is
the source of water for a public water system (Table 1)
• where there is a livestock watering use, only occurred once but had a microcystin value
above livestock watering levels of 2.3 µg/L
• Recreational advisories shall be associated with impairments of the water contact
recreation use. Drinking water advisories shall be associated with impairments of the
domestic water supply use. Exceedance of the reference concentration for livestock
shall be associated with impairment of the livestock watering use.
A waterbody is classified as Category 3B based on the data window if it has had a single
season public health advisory issued by the OHA, in conjunction with other federal, state,
county, city or local agencies, with no associated toxin data; or if it had raw source water
exceeding drinking water values for vulnerable people only for water bodies with known drinking
water intakes. Categories 3C and 3D do not apply to CyanoHABs.
A waterbody is placed on the Category 4 list when data indicate that at least one designated
use is not supported as a result of a CyanoHAB and a TMDL is not needed because:
• 4A: a TMDL has been developed and approved
• 4B: Other pollution controls are in place (alternative plan), or
• 4C: Impairment caused by pollution not by a pollutant, such as low water flow
To be delisted from the 303(d) list, a waterbody must be free of an OHA health advisory for
more than three consecutive seasons and have supplemental data consistent with OHA’s
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 28
advisory lifting procedures (photos, cell counts and toxin data below OHA guidelines) for at least
two of those seasons.
These criteria for listing and delisting are current for the 2022 Integrated Report (Oregon
Department of Environmental Quality, 2022 Final Integrated Report, 2022). Criteria are subject
to change and may be updated in future Integrated Report cycles.
Evaluation for TMDL development / Alternative Plan
The federal Clean Water Act requires Oregon or the EPA to develop a TMDL or execute an
enforceable Category 4B Alternative Plan for every pollutant/waterbody combination on the
Integrated Report Category 5 303(d) list impaired by CyanoHABs to ensure that state water
quality standards are met and beneficial uses are protected. The required elements for
developing a TMDL are identified in the Federal Code of Regulations at 40 CFR § 130.7 and in
OAR 340-042-0040.
TMDL development projects are prioritized based on a variety of factors including risk to
beneficial use, court ordered schedules, and permit issuance priorities. TMDL development
priorities are documented in the Integrated Report and in the Performance Partnership
Agreement between DEQ and EPA.
After a waterbody is listed as impaired by CyanoHABs, the TMDL program evaluates existing
and additional data to better understand the condition of the waterbody, if the impairment is
caused by pollutants or other conditions, and if a TMDL or Alternative Plan needs to be
developed in light of the data analysis.
Decision point: Is a TMDL/Alternative plan needed?
If the initial data review and analysis indicate that a TMDL or Alternative Plan for CyanoHABs in
a waterbody is not needed, the TMDL program recommends that the DEQ Water Quality
Assessment Program re-evaluate the 303(d) category listing. This may include listing the
waterbody as Category 4C (impairment not caused by a pollutant) or delisting the waterbody.
If the initial data review and analysis determines that a TMDL or an Alternative Plan is needed,
the TMDL program works with regional basin coordinators and the laboratory, to develop,
implement, and monitor a TMDL or an Alternative Plan for pollutants contributing to the
CyanoHAB impairment.
Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL)
A TMDL is the maximum amount of pollutant that can be present in a waterbody while still
meeting water quality standards. A TMDL is set to the loading capacity for any identified
pollutants and consists of:
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 29
• Waste Load Allocations allocated to permits for point sources regulated under the
federal Water Pollution Control Act 402 33 USC Section 1342.
• Load Allocations allocated to existing nonpoint sources including runoff, deposition, soil
contamination and groundwater discharges, or to background sources.
• Reserve Capacity to allocate for increases in pollutant loads from future growth and new
or expanded sources. The TMDL may allocate no reserve capacity and explain that
decision.
• Margin of Safety to account for uncertainty related to the TMDL and, where feasible,
quantifies uncertainties associated with estimating pollutant loads, modeling water
quality and monitoring water quality. The TMDL will explain how the margin of safety
was derived and incorporated into the TMDL.
To develop a TMDL for CyanoHABs, the TMDL program, in consultation with the Regional
Basin Coordinator and LEAD, conducts analyses and/or modeling to determine:
• Pollutant identification: the pollutant(s) causing the impairment addressed in the TMDL
• Water quality standards and beneficial uses: For the waterbody/basin, relevant water
quality standards and beneficial uses will be identified and those most sensitive to
impairment by the pollutant(s) will be specified. For CyanoHABs, the standards assess
are based on the criteria for a Category 5 listing and the beneficial uses include:
Domestic water supply
o
Irrigation
o
Livestock watering
o
Water contact recreation
o
• Loading capacity: the amount of a pollutant or pollutants that a waterbody can receive
and still meet water quality standards.
• Excess load: the difference between the actual pollutant load and loading capacity
• Sources or source categories: actual pollutant loading from identified sources.
• Seasonal variation: the seasonal variation and critical conditions in stream flow, sensitive
beneficial uses, pollutant loading so that water quality standards will be attained and
maintained during all seasons of the year
• The Water Quality Management Plan (WQMP): the framework of management
strategies to attain and maintain water quality standards.
Category 4B Alternative Plans
A Category 4B Alternative Plan is intended to meet water quality standards in a reasonable
period of time using other pollution control requirements not necessarily included in a TMDL
(Monschein & Reems, 2009).If an Alternative Plan is determined to be appropriate, the TMDL
program works with the Regional Basin Coordinator and LEAD to develop, implement, and
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 30
monitor the plan. According to EPA guidance, an Alternative Plan must include these six
elements (Monschein & Reems, 2009):
• Identification of segment and statement of problem causing the impairment
• Description of the pollution controls and how they will achieve WQS, including a
description of the pollutant loads needed to meet WQS and a description of the
requirements under which the controls will be implemented
• An estimate or projection of the time when WQS will be met
• Schedule for implementing pollution controls
• Monitoring plan to track effectiveness of pollution controls
• Commitment to revise pollution controls, as necessary
Water Quality Management Plan
A WQMP, or framework, to guide how to reduce pollution to those waters impaired by
CyanoHABs, is issued with every DEQ-developed TMDL. The WQMP along with the
Assessment and Monitoring Strategy connects the planning and development for
implementation and monitoring. OAR 340-042-0040 (Establishing TMDLs) identifies the
elements of a WQMP.
LEAD, in consultation with the TMDL program and DEQ regional staff, designs additional
monitoring for informing the analysis and development of a TMDL or alternative plan for a
waterbody impaired by CyanoHABs. This process develops a Quality Assurance Project Plan
(QAPP) and Sampling Analysis Plan (SAP) for TMDL/Alternative Plan development monitoring
projects. Laboratory staff coordinate and execute field sampling and water quality analysis for
the projects.
Decision point: Do permits meet TMDL/Alternative
Plan?
A required component of a TMDL is identifying and quantifying pollutant contributions from point
sources. Wasteload allocations (WLAs) are allocated to permits for point sources regulated
under the federal Clean Water Act section 402. For the purposes of CyanoHABs, the most
relevant permits are National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits. Water
Pollution Control Facilities (WPCF) permittees do not discharge to surface waters; however,
WPCF permits allow land-based discharge of pollutants that may eventually enter surface
waters through runoff and groundwater discharge. The TMDL WQMP plan identifies the point
sources evaluated for the TMDL and how WLAs in a TMDL will be implemented for those
sources subject to permit requirements in ORS 468B.050 (water quality permit).
Permit development and issuance
If one or more existing permits does not meet the TMDL WLA or Alternative Plan requirements
or a facility/entity applies for a new permit, DEQ develops and issues a new permit as outlined
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 31
OAR 340-045-005. Waste Load Allocations and other Alternative Plan management strategies
are incorporated into the permit by the WQP Program during permit development for new
issuance or renewal.
Nutrients are a primary focus of NPDES Permits addressing water quality impairments by
CyanoHABs. Several categories of permits support the control of nutrients or surrogate
pollutants, most notably:
• NPDES permits for discharges of wastewater (sewage treatment plants, industries such
as pulp and paper mills, stormwater runoff, pesticide application, and Confined Animal
Feeding Operations); and
• WPCF permits for the prevention of discharges (onsite sewage disposal systems (septic)
and land irrigation as part of Confined Animal Feeding Operations).
Effluent limits in permits must be consistent with the assumptions used to develop TMDL WLAs.
In the absence of a TMDL, such as Category 4B Alternative Plans, DEQ must assess the need
for effluent limits based on water quality standards and where necessary, develop effluent limits.
Permit meets wasteload allocations
Water quality-based discharge limits in NPDES permits must be consistent with the
assumptions and requirements of WLAs in approved TMDLs or Alternative Plans. If the existing
permit meets the requirements for the effluent-based discharge of pollutants identified in the
TMDL, the permittee continues to follow the requirements for discharge, treatment, best
management practices, and monitoring described in the active permit.
TMDL/Alternative Plan implementation
DEQ Regional staff work with TMDL staff, LEAD, DMAs, facilities, or RPs to implement the
requirements of the TMDL or Alternative Plan. The TMDL/Alternative Plan implementation
process starts with the development and issuance of a WQMP or an Alternative Plan for
CyanoHABs and the identified surrogate measures. A WQMP identifies the WLAs (point
sources) and LAs (nonpoint sources) evaluated for the TMDL and how the allocations in a
TMDL will be implemented by DMAs, facilities, or RPs for those sources. A Category 4B
Alternative Plan is designed to attain water quality standards on a faster schedule than a TMDL,
defers or bypasses the development of a TMDL, and is implemented upon DEQ approval.
TMDL/Alternative Plan Effectiveness Monitoring
DEQ Regional staff work with TMDL program staff, LEAD staff, Designated Management
Agencies (DMAs), facilities, or responsible persons (RPs) to design effectiveness monitoring for
a waterbody impaired by CyanoHABs where TMDL or Alternative Plans are implemented. This
includes development of a QAPP and SAP. DMAs, facilities, RPs, or the DEQ laboratory
(Alternative Plans only) conduct field sampling and water quality analyses for pollutants and
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 32
surrogate measures identified that influence the frequency, magnitude, and extent of
CyanoHABs. Water quality data collected from the projects are evaluated according to quality
assurance/quality control criteria described in the developed QAPPs and SAPs and are posted
to the DEQ Ambient Water Quality Monitoring System.
Decision Point: Are TMDL/Alternative Plan goals met?
Water quality data and surrogate measures collected as part of effectiveness monitoring are
used to evaluate progress toward meeting water quality standards and management targets
described in the approved WQMP or Alternative Plan. When a TMDL is issued for a CyanoHAB,
the waterbody is placed on the 303(d) list Category 4A (TMDL developed and approved). DEQ,
DMAs, RPs, and others continue periodic monitoring to evaluate progress towards meeting
TMDL allocations and surrogates. These data contribute to a DEQ publication on water quality
status and trends analysis each year. The analysis informs DEQ, other state and federal
agencies, and the public on the condition of waters and if TMDL targets are being achieved, if
water quality is improving or degrading, the pace of improvement or degradation, what actions,
if any, are being taken to improve water quality, and where water quality data are and are not
being collected.
Based on the expected timeline in the WQMP or Alternative Plan, DEQ will update the
Integrated Report (305(b) and 303(d) lists) in the subsequent cycle when monitoring data show
the water body attains water quality standards. The assessment status is changed from
Category 4A to Category 2; however, the TMDL or Alternative Plan remains in effect.
If monitoring data do not indicate acceptable progress towards water quality targets, TMDL
allocations, or surrogate measures, the DEQ WMS reevaluates the approved TMDL or
Alternative Plan, including allocations and surrogate measures. The DEQ Watershed
Management Section, DEQ regional staff, the DEQ laboratory, DMAs, RPs, and others re-
engage to update the targets in the WQMP or Alternative Plan and the effectiveness monitoring
strategy. This cycle of development, monitoring, and evaluation fits within the broader adaptive
management process, which allows DEQ and implementing entities to course-correct towards
achieving water quality standards.
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 33
Table 5. Specific activities and subprograms identified as currently active or needed for addressing Clean Water Act issues related to
CyanoHABs in Oregon waterbodies.
Currently
DEQ Program Activity/subprogram Recommendation(s)
Active?
WQA List waterbodies as impaired (Category 5) by CyanoHABs Yes Continue and update as
based on current Integrated Report Methodology needed
WQA List other waters based on data showing cyanotoxin No As resources allow
thresholds were exceeded but a recreational advisory was
not issued
WQA/TMDL IMD for Antidegradation Policy Implementation for nonpoint Yes Continue
sources
WQA/TMDL Evaluate the potential for numeric nutrient criteria No As resources allow
development during the next triennial review
WQS Develop water quality criteria for cyanotoxins No As resources and
priorities allow
TMDL/Regions Improve regional coordination among DEQ and partners for Yes Continue and expand
addressing CyanoHABs related water quality impairments
TMDL/Regions Develop TMDLs or Alternative Plans for CyanoHAB listed No As resources and
waters priorities allow
TMDL Dedicate a TMDL analyst to specialize in CyanoHABs No As resources and
analysis and management priorities allow
TMDL/Regions Develop regional or basin-specific approaches to managing No As resources and
CyanoHABs priorities allow
TMDL/Regions Consider alternatives to TMDLs, such as Watershed Based No As resources and
Plans, as appropriate priorities allow
TMDL/WQP Develop loading capacities for pollutants that are identified to No As resources and
cause CyanoHABs in waterbodies priorities allow
TMDL/Regions Address nutrient, sediment, and other CyanoHAB related LAs Yes Continue and expand as
through DMA implementation plans, Agriculture Water resources allow
Quality Rules and Plans, and FPA
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 34
Currently
DEQ Program Activity/subprogram Recommendation(s)
Active?
TMDL/Regions Evaluate effectiveness of DMA management plans, Yes Continue and expand as
Agriculture Water Quality Rules and Plans, and FPA in resources allow
meeting LAs
TMDL/Regions Add CyanoHABs-related work in Interagency Agreements to No As resources and
facilitate other agencies to develop CyanoHAB collaborative priorities allow
approaches
TMDL/Regions Work with ODFW, USFWS, USFS, USBOR, USACE, EPA No As resources and
and others to address the role of fisheries in lake priorities allow
eutrophication and CyanoHABs
Regions/Onsite Continue and promote use of local authorities to require on- Yes Continue with updates as
site system evaluations where needed needed
Regions/Onsite Explore ways to provide Clean Water SRF or other funding to Yes Continue and expand as
assist with repair or replacement of on-site systems resources and priorities
allow
Regions/Onsite Work with local government to implement on-site system No As resources and
evaluations near waterbodies with CyanoHABs priorities allow
Regions/Onsite Consider requiring periodic inspections of on-site systems No As resources and
priorities allow
WQP Continue no discharge of wastewater to lakes/reservoir rule Yes Continue
Regions/WQP Clarify ability to use herbicides and other chemicals for Yes As resources and
CyanoHAB treatment – either through conformance with priorities allow
FIFRA labeling or through permit
WQP Continue to address CyanoHABs through the 401 process Yes Continue and update as
including certification conditions needed
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 35
Synthesis and recommendations
DEQ’s CyanoHABs strategy provides information on the multifaceted ways in which the agency
addresses CyanoHABs in freshwater ecosystems of Oregon. The strategy also describes how
DEQ works with other government agencies and stakeholders, particularly OHA and drinking
water providers, to respond to CyanoHABs affecting water supplies and recreational activities.
Throughout the development of the strategy, we have documented additional needs to improve
DEQ’s approach to detecting, monitoring, assessing, and managing CyanoHABs. In this
section, we discuss the importance of incorporating concepts and approaches related to climate
change and environmental justice into the strategy. We also outline current resource limitations
and funding needed to sustain and improve the agency’s strategy. We conclude with the near-
and long-term outlook for CyanoHABs management and prevention in Oregon.
Climate Change
The degree to which climate change has contributed to increased frequency, extent, and
magnitude of CyanoHABs remains intensely debated. Recent work has claimed both that
CyanoHABs in freshwater ecosystems have grown more frequent, extensive, and severe
around the world due to climate change (Ho, Michalak, & Pahlevan, 2019) and while other
research suggests the incidence of algal blooms has remained stable over the past several
decades (Oliver, et al., 2017). The lack of long-term data does not allow an assessment of how
characteristics of CyanoHABs have changed over time in Oregon.
Despite the lack of specific data characterizing long-term trends, DEQ has reason to believe
that environmental conditions favorable for increased frequency, extent, and severity of
CyanoHABs will become more prevalent across the state in the foreseeable future (Oregon
Department of Environmental Quality, Oregon DEQ Harmful Algal Bloom (HAB) Strategy, 2011).
A report issued by the Oregon Climate Change Research Institute provides evidence that
human activities have been primarily responsible for the 1.5 increase in average annual
temperatures over the past century (Dello & Mote, 2010). For the remainder of the 21st century,
℉
average annual temperatures are expected to increase at a rate of 0.2-1.0 per decade,
summer precipitation will decrease 14% by the 2080s, and increases in extreme precipitation
℉
events are likely. These types of climatic shifts have led to conditions favorable for
cyanobacterial growth in other regions (Paerl & Huisman, 2008).
In 2020, DEQ established a new Climate Protection Program focused on reducing greenhouse
gas emissions. However, the program currently does not describe how DEQ will address and
mitigate environmental effects of climate change such as CyanoHABs. Based on the updated
CyanoHAB strategy, we recommend the DEQ programs work together to take the following
actions to address climate change effects on CyanoHABs in Oregon waterbodies:
• Identify waterbodies at risk for developing CyanoHABs due to effects of climate change
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 36
• Develop strategies to mitigate effects of climate change in waterbodies currently
experiencing CyanoHABs
• Expand forecasting and monitoring modalities for CyanoHABs
• Educate the public on how different aspects of climate change can increase the
frequency, severity, and extent of CyanoHABs in Oregon waters
• Work with other state agencies and partners to provide resources to lake managers and
residents to mitigate effects of climate change on CyanoHABs
As this strategy undergoes updates in the future, other actions may be identified and prioritized.
Environmental Justice
DEQ is committed to the principles of Environmental Justice. In the original staff report to the
EQC on Environmental Justice in Oregon, exposure to water pollution is singled out as a topic
requiring improved coordination, sampling, and communication with affected communities
(Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, Environmental Justice, 2022).
To inform the exposure risk and to develop an equitable approach for CyanoHAB management
and prevention in waterbodies used by marginalized communities for dietary, cultural, and
recreational practices in Oregon, DEQ proposes the following measurable actions:
• Enhance public participation in DEQ’s actions and monitoring decisions to ensure the
meaningful involvement of people who may be affected by CyanoHABs
• Identify racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic groups that may bear a disproportionate share
of negative health, cultural, and environmental consequences resulting from CyanoHABs
and include these in prioritization for actions.
• Build stronger relationships with Oregon tribes to understand the impact of CyanoHABs
on Indigenous peoples
• Work with OHA DWS to identify underserved or marginalized populations served by
PWSs that have had or currently have disproportionate risk to contamination from
pollutants
• Develop an agency plan to address language access disparities related to CyanoHAB
notifications and advisories, including ways the agency can provide important
environmental and public health information to people with limited English proficiency
Funding
Funding for current DEQ CyanoHAB monitoring, analysis, and mitigation measures
comes from several sources. Several of these sources are targeted for specific activities
and projects while others provide overall funding to agency positions and resources. The
main sources include:
• State General Fund and Lottery Fund appropriations (e.g., agency budget and policy
bills)
• Legislative, for monitoring activities, technical assistance, analytical support, and data
management services for recreational and drinking water programs
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 37
• National Lakes Assessment Federal Monitoring Initiative Grants under Section 106 of
the Clean Water Act
• Federal CWA Section 319 Funds
The degree to which different funding sources support monitoring, laboratory analysis, and data
analysis varies over time. Funding allocations within DEQ can be broken down into staff time for
field sampling, monitoring equipment, laboratory analysis equipment, laboratory staff time, data
analytical resources, and data analysis staff time. LEAD, and the TMDL and DWP subprograms
are primarily involved with CyanoHABs related efforts, although WQP can be involved
sporadically through NPDES permits, 401 Certification, and general permits for
pesticide/herbicide applications.
Overall, LEAD currently receives the most dedicated resources at DEQ to address CyanoHABs
through several funding mechanisms and collaborations with state and federal agencies.
Resources for LEAD staff, both in terms of FTE and laboratory equipment for analysis of
cyanotoxins and nutrients, have increased since the implementation of OAR 333-061-0510 in
2019. LEAD also received additional staffing and equipment resources following the 2021
Oregon legislative session to improve monitoring of recreational waterbodies and other areas
upstream of drinking water sources that may be contributing to CyanoHAB blooms. In terms of
collaborations, LEAD has an interagency agreement with OHA work on special projects related
to cyanotoxin monitoring. Most recently (2020), OHA provided DEQ funding to investigate the
utility of quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) to protect public water supplies. In 2017
DEQ received supplemental EPA funding to monitor lakes across Oregon as part of the National
Lakes Assessment (US EPA, National Lakes Assessment, 2021). These funds supported the
collection of chemical, biological, and habitat indicators at 29 lakes including cyanotoxins. This
program was funded again in 2022 and DEQ monitored 23 lakes as part of the study.
In general, the TMDL, DWP, and WQP programs in the Water Quality Division receive little
dedicated funding and resources to address CyanoHABs. However, individual projects or
responses to emergencies have received dedicated resources as needed under specific
circumstances. Support for staff time spent on CyanoHABs in the Water Quality Division
programs comes from State and General and Lottery Fund appropriations, EPA 319 funding for
nonpoint source issues, and interagency agreements (i.e., OHA DWS support of DWP
activities). Funding from the 319 Program has been used to address to address the restoration
and protection needs of priority lakes, ponds, and reservoirs with approved TMDLs for
CyanoHABs in Oregon (Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, 2022 Final Integrated
Report, 2022). Funding and resources for CyanoHABs related efforts also are embedded in
standard business expenses and general CWA activities, including Integrated Report
development, issuance of NPDES permits, 401 certifications, and nonpoint source
implementation activities, among others.
Current and projected funding for sustaining and enhancing the strategy remain insufficient to
meet objectives outlined in each component of the DEQ CyanoHAB Strategy (Tables 2Table 2.
Specific actions and subprograms identified as currently part of or needed for addressing
drinking water related issues related to CyanoHABs in Oregon freshwaters., 4, and 5). Other
states, including Table 1Washington, California, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Nebraska, and New
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 38
Hampshire have used funding mechanisms such as registration fees, grants, or loans.
Regardless of the approaches or mechanisms utilized, additional funding and resources will be
required for DEQ to fully implement the agency’s strategy.
Conclusions
The updates provided to the DEQ CyanoHABs strategy here reflect the ways in which the
agency works internally and with partners to detect, monitor, assess, and manage CyanoHABs
across Oregon. DEQ has made significant progress towards achieving goals on objectives
outlined in the original DEQ HABs Strategy, with 65% of activities listed originally currently
implemented or under development (Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, Oregon
DEQ Harmful Algal Bloom (HAB) Strategy, 2011). However, as detailed in this document,
expanded work and funding are still needed to fully realize and implement the strategy.
We intend the strategy to be updated regularly to assess progress towards meeting
recommended actions detailed in Tables 2Table 2. Specific actions and subprograms identified
as currently part of or needed for addressing drinking water related issues related to
CyanoHABs in Oregon freshwaters., 4, and 5 to identify emerging issues surrounding
CyanoHABs in Oregon. DEQ expects that CyanoHABs will continue to impact water quality in
Oregon freshwater ecosystems for the foreseeable future. While most past and current DEQ
activities have focused on lakes and reservoirs, a growing body of evidence suggests
CyanoHABs in rivers and streams could also significantly affect human health and downstream
ecosystems (Interstate Technology Regulatory Council, 2022). Implementing the current
strategy and working towards the recommendations outlined in this document will allow DEQ to
meet the capacity to monitor, manage, and prevent CyanoHABs in freshwater ecosystems
throughout Oregon.
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 39
Appendix A: Marine HABs
The 2011 DEQ HABs strategy only focused on HABs that occurred in the freshwater
environment and did not address blooms that occur in estuarine and marine environments
(Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, Oregon DEQ Harmful Algal Bloom (HAB)
Strategy, 2011). Harmful Algal Blooms have been responsible for closures of shellfish and crab
fisheries off the Oregon coast in recent years, resulting in negative social and economic impacts
for coastal communities and across the state. Although these blooms largely occur in the open
water habitats off the Oregon coast, the effects of HABs are often most felt along the shorelines.
In response, the state of Oregon and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association have
been engaged in efforts to research and monitor the potential causes and extent of HABs to
better understand the risks ( (Oregon Ocean Information, 2023).
Marine HABs are typically caused by types of phytoplanktonic algae which produce biotoxins
that accumulate throughout the marine food web. The two most common biotoxin producing
phytoplankton genus that occur off the Oregon coast are: (1) dinoflagellate blooms from the
genus Alexandrium which produce saxitoxin, a neurotoxin that causes paralytic shellfish
poisoning in humans and (2) diatom blooms from the genus Pseudo-nitzchia which produce
domoic acid that causes amnesic shellfish poisoning in humans (Oregon Department of Fish
and Wildlife, 2023).
In 2006, ODFW in collaboration with Oregon State university, University of Oregon and the
NOAA Northwest Fisheries Science Center were awarded a 5 year nearly $2.3 million
competitive grant from the NOAA CSCOR Monitoring and Event Response for a Harmful Algal
Bloom (MERHAB) research program to develop an integrated HAB monitoring and event
response program. This program, MOCHA, begun collecting data in 2007. ODFW staff, in
conjunction with ODA monitored 10 sites along the coast of Oregon for any potential signs of
the phytoplankton that cause Domoic Acid (Pseudo-nitzschia sp.) and Paralytic Shellfish
Poisoning (Alexandrium sp.) (Oregon Conservation Strategy, 2023).
While HABs are often localized events, research suggests that the frequency and spatial extent
of HABs off the west coast has increased over the last several decades. A geographically
extensive and long lasting bloom of Pseudo-nitzchia that affected marine wildlife and fisheries
along the west coast began in the spring of 2015. The bloom stretched from Alaska to California
and persisted for longer than what is considered normal (Oregon Conservation Strategy, 2023).
Monitoring for these HABs and sampling shellfish for food safety have resulted in closures or
opening delays for both recreational and commercial shellfish fisheries in Oregon. In its 2018
Integrated Report assessment (Anthony, 2020), DEQ concluded that since the entire Oregon
Coast had a shellfish advisory for a minimum of one shellfish type (i.e. mussels, scallops, clams,
razor clams, crabs and bay clams) in every year of the 10-year data window (January 1, 2008
through December 31, 2017), the entire Oregon coast would be listed as Category 5:Impaired
for impairment of the Fishing: Shellfish consumption beneficial use.
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 40
Figure 4. Schematic of Oregon coastal shellfish advisories by year from 2007-2017.
Monitoring for marine HABs is often conducted at two levels: sampling marine waters to monitor
the phytoplankton for HABs and sampling organisms that consume phytoplankton to monitor for
the accumulation of the disease-causing toxins. Oregon has not directly sampled its coastal
waters for HABs since 2012 due to a lack of ongoing funding, however, Oregon Department of
Agriculture continues to monitor selected bivalve shellfish species for biotoxins (Oregon
Department of Fish and Wildlife, 2023).
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 41
References
Anthony, B. (2020). Methodology for Oregon’s 2018 Water Quality Report and List of Water
Quality Limited Waters. Portland, OR: Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.
Retrieved from
https://www.oregon.gov/deq/wq/Documents/wqa2018AssessMethodR.pdf
Dello, K. D., & Mote, P. W. (2010). Oregon climate assessment report. Corvallis, OR: Oregon
State University.
Ho, J. C., Michalak, A. M., & Pahlevan, N. (2019, February 17). Widespread global increase in
intense lake phytoplankton blooms since the 1980s. Nature, 667-670.
doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1648-7
Interstate Technology Regulatory Council. (2022). Strategies for Preventing and Managing
Harmful Cyanobacterial Blooms (Benthic). Retrieved January 29, 2022, from
https://itrcweb.org/teams/active/hcb
Monschein, E., & Reems, S. (2009). Category 4b - Current National Status and Trends.
Washington, DC: US EPA.
Oliver, S. K., Collins, S. M., Soranno, P. A., Wagner, T., Stanley, E. H., Jones, J. R., . . . Lottig,
N. R. (2017). Unexpected stasis in a changing world: Lake nutrient and chlorophyll
trends since 1990. Global Change Biology, 23, 5455-5467. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.13810
Oregon Conservation Strategy. (2023). Retrieved from Strategy spotlight: harmful algal blooms
in marine waters: https://www.oregonconservationstrategy.org/success-story/strategy-
spotlight-harmful-algal-blooms-in-marine-waters/
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. (2011, June). Oregon DEQ Harmful Algal Bloom
(HAB) Strategy. Retrieved January 27, 2022, from
https://www.oregon.gov/deq/FilterDocs/HABstrategy.pdf
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. (2022, September 1). 2022 Final Integrated
Report. Retrieved January 25, 2023, from
https://rstudioconnect.deq.state.or.us/2022_IR_Database/
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. (2022). Environmental Justice. Retrieved January
28, 2022, from https://www.oregon.gov/deq/about-us/Pages/Environmental-Justice.aspx
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. (2023). Retrieved from About Drinking Water
Protection: https://www.oregon.gov/deq/wq/programs/Pages/dwp.aspx
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. (2023). Harmful Algal Blooms: Drinking Water
Cyanotoxin Monitoring. Retrieved from https://www.oregon.gov/deq/wq/Pages/Drinking-
Water-Cyanotoxin-Monitoring.aspx
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. (2023). Satellite Estimates of Cyanobacteria in
Oregon Lakes and Reservoirs. Retrieved from
https://rstudioconnect.deq.state.or.us/Oregon-cyanobacteria-satellite-report/
Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. (2023). Marine Resources: Commercial and
recreational marine fisheries. Retrieved from
https://www.dfw.state.or.us/mrp/shellfish/razorclams/harmful_algae.asp
Oregon Health Authority. (2022). Retrieved January 27, 2022, from Oregon Drinking Water
Services:
https://www.oregon.gov/oha/PH/HEALTHYENVIRONMENTS/DRINKINGWATER/Pages/
index.aspx
Oregon Health Authority. (2022). Retrieved January 27 2022, from Cyanobacteria Blooms:
https://www.oregon.gov/oha/PH/HEALTHYENVIRONMENTS/RECREATION/HARMFUL
ALGAEBLOOMS/Pages/index.aspx
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 42
Oregon Health Authority. (2022). Cyanobacteria Advisory Archive. Retrieved January 26, 2022,
from
https://www.oregon.gov/oha/PH/HEALTHYENVIRONMENTS/RECREATION/HARMFUL
ALGAEBLOOMS/Pages/archive.aspx
Oregon Health Authority. (2023). Cyanotoxin Monitoring Requirements For Sources Determined
to be Susceptible. Retrieved from
https://www.oregon.gov/oha/PH/HEALTHYENVIRONMENTS/DRINKINGWATER/RULE
S/Documents/cyanotoxins/cyanotoxin-monitoring-flowchart.pdf
Oregon Ocean Information. (2023). Retrieved from Harmful Algal Blooms:
https://www.oregonocean.info/index.php/ocean-issues/63-harmful-algal-blooms
Paerl, H. W., & Huisman, J. (2008). Blooms like it hot. Science, 320, 57-58.
US EPA. (2021). 319 Grant Program for States and Territories. Retrieved January 28, 2022,
from https://www.epa.gov/nps/319-grant-program-states-and-territories
US EPA. (2021, July 15). Clean Water Act Section 303(d): Impaired Waters and Total Maximum
Daily Loads (TMDLs). Retrieved January 26, 2022, from https://www.epa.gov/tmdl
US EPA. (2021). National Lakes Assessment. Retrieved January 28, 2022, from
https://www.epa.gov/national-aquatic-resource-surveys/nla
US EPA. (2023). Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) in Water Bodies.
Retrieved from https://www.epa.gov/cyanohabs
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. (2021). DNR Surface Water Grant Application
Guide. Retrieved 28 2022, January, from https://dnr.wi.gov/files/pdf/pubs/cf/cf0002.pdf
Oregon DEQ Freshwater Cyanobacteria Harmful Algal Blooms (CyanoHABs) Strategy 43