HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS (HABS)
PROGRAM GUIDE
www.dec.ny.gov
Contents
List of Tables ....................................................................................................................ii
List of Figures ...................................................................................................................ii
Abbreviations and Acronyms ........................................................................................... iii
1. Executive Summary ................................................................................................. 1
2. Introduction .............................................................................................................. 2
2.1. Purpose of this Document ............................................................................... 2
2.2. Scope, Jurisdiction and Audience ................................................................... 2
2.3. Background ..................................................................................................... 2
2.4. Agency Responsibilities .................................................................................. 4
3. DEC Bloom Status Designation in New York ........................................................... 8
3.1. Bloom Status Criteria ...................................................................................... 8
3.2. Threshold Development ................................................................................ 12
3.3. Cyanotoxins and Other Harmful Compounds ............................................... 13
4. Bloom Reporting: HABs Documentation by DEC ................................................... 15
4.1. Surveillance & Sampling: Two approaches ................................................... 15
4.2. HABs Monitoring and Reporting in New York ............................................... 17
5. Outreach ................................................................................................................ 19
5.1. Communication to Collaborators ................................................................... 19
5.2. DEC HABs Webpages .................................................................................. 20
5.3. Additional Outreach Efforts ........................................................................ 22
5.4. DEC Monitoring Program Reporting ............................................................. 23
6. Methods for Bloom Prevention and Control ........................................................... 24
6.1. 2018 Governor’s HABs Initiative ................................................................... 24
6.2. Bloom Prevention .......................................................................................... 25
6.3. In-Lake Bloom Control Options ..................................................................... 26
7. Appendices ............................................................................................................ 29
7.1. Appendix A. Glossary ................................................................................... 29
7.2. Appendix B. DEC Suspicious Algal Bloom Report Form ............................... 30
7.3. Appendix C. Warning Sign ............................................................................ 33
7.4. Appendix D. References and Resources ...................................................... 34
i | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
List of Tables
Table 2.1 Summary of state agency programmatic responsibilities ................................ 6
Table 3.1 Summary of the types of information regarding HABs that are received by the
DEC HABs Program and descriptions of how this information is used to determine
bloom status; updated in 2020. ..................................................................................... 11
Table 3.2 WHO guidance values for the relative probability of health effects resulting
from exposure to cyanobacteria blooms and microcystin .............................................. 13
Table 6.1 Summary of water management techniques used for algal blooms, their
effectiveness, DEC permitting requirements and relative cost. ..................................... 27
List of Figures
Figure 2.1 Summary of organization roles, interest groups, and exposure groups that
are served by the DEC HABs Program. .......................................................................... 7
Figure 3.1 Decision tree that indicates the process by which DEC HABs Program staff
determine the status of a potential bloom; updated in 2020. ......................................... 10
Figure 5.1 Example of the statewide map of HABs locations that is displayed on the
DEC HABs notifications page through NYHABS. .......................................................... 22
ii | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
Abbreviations and Acronyms
Acronym Definition
µg/L Micrograms per liter (parts per billion)
BG Blue green
BWAM Bureau of Water Assessment and Management
CALM Consolidated Assessment and Listing Methodology
CSLAP Citizen Statewide Lake Assessment Program
CWA Clean Water Act
DEC Department of Environmental Conservation
DESP Division of Environmental Stewardship and Planning
DOW Division of Water
ELAP Environmental Laboratory Approval Program
HA Health Advisory
HAB Harmful Algal Bloom
LCBP Lake Champlain Basin Program
LCC Lake Champlain Committee
LCI Lake Classification and Inventory Program
LHD Local Health Department
LMAS Lake Management and Assessment Section
NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NYC New York City
NYCDEP New York City Department of Environmental Protection
NYSDOH New York State Department of Health
NYHABS New York HAB System
OPRHP Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation
PWS Public Water Supply
RIBS Rotating Integrated Basin Sampling
SDWA Safe Drinking Water Act
SSC State Sanitary Code
SUNY State University of New York
TMDL Total Maximum Daily Load
TOGS Technical & Operational Guidance Series
USACE United States Army Core of Engineers
USEPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
VDH Vermont Department of Health
WHO World Health Organization
WI/PWL Waterbody Inventory/Priority Waterbodies List
iii | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
1. Executive Summary
Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs) in freshwater generally consist of cyanobacteria (also
referred to as blue-green algae). Cyanobacteria are naturally present in low numbers in
most marine and freshwater systems but under certain conditions, particularly high
nutrients and warm temperatures, the organisms can begin to multiply rapidly and form
blooms. Several types of cyanobacteria have the potential to produce toxins and other
harmful compounds that can pose a health risk to people and animals through
ingestion, skin contact, or inhalation. The New York State DEC suggests avoiding
contact with any water that is discolored or has algal scums on the surface.
The purpose of this guide is to describe how DEC identifies and documents
cyanobacteria HABs, communicates health risks to the public, provides guidance on
bloom management, and conducts research. The primary audience for this guide is
New York state agency staff, but the guide may be useful to others, particularly the wide
range of partners involved in addressing HABs in New York. The DEC HABs Program
uses a combination of visual surveillance, chlorophyll concentration (specifically, the
portion of total chlorophyll that can be fluoroscopically attributed to cyanobacteria, also
known as blue-green chlorophyll) and total microcystins concentration (a toxin produced
by cyanobacteria) to determine bloom status (No Bloom, Confirmed Bloom, or
Confirmed with High Toxins Bloom). The bloom status system provides a uniform way
to rapidly communicate interpreted information about HABs throughout the state.
DEC receives HABs reports from state agency staff, the public, and several
collaborating partners. DEC staff work to support structured monitoring on waterbodies
prone to HABs through existing monitoring programs and site-specific partnerships.
Rapid and effective outreach is a critical component of the DEC HABs Program.
Communication of information about HABs serves to inform the public’s recreational
choices. DEC maintains the New York HAB System (NYHABS) which features an
interactive map of current and archived bloom locations and a shared inter-agency
database for rapid communication of bloom occurrences and sampling results. The
DEC HABs Program publishes annual and cumulative summaries of bloom reports.
At Governor Cuomo’s direction, DEC is leading a multi-agency, statewide initiative to
aggressively combat HABs, protect drinking water quality and the economy. In 2018,
four summits brought together national, state, and local experts to discuss how to
reduce the frequency of HABs. The summits drove the creation of Action Plans for 12
priority lakes and advanced technology pilots. These efforts will lead to knowledge that
can be applied to waterbodies across the state. This guide includes information
regarding HAB prevention and control approaches; watershed-based nutrient input
reduction, water treatment strategies, and in-lake control methods are summarized.
1 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
2. Introduction
2.1. Purpose of this Document
The purpose of the DEC HABs Program Guide is to describe how DEC identifies
and documents freshwater cyanobacteria HABs throughout the state, communicates
health risks to the public, provides guidance on bloom management, interacts with
other agencies, and conducts research.
2.2. Scope, Jurisdiction and Audience
This guide follows the scope of the DEC HABs Program. The DEC HABs Program
serves all surface waters in New York, although HABs are most likely to be observed
and reported in lakes, reservoirs, or ponds. Because of an increased likelihood of
public exposure, the program focuses on waterbodies that have public access, serve
as drinking water supplies or have
regulated bathing beaches. The What is the DEC HABs Program?
jurisdictional framework in New York,
The program consists of DEC staff within
and therefore the DEC HABs
Program, does not distinguish DOW BWAM who work to identify bloom
between public and private waters status, oversee HAB monitoring and
since all of the waters of the state may surveillance activities, communicate
be used by the public (see the New public health risks, and conduct outreach,
York State Clean Lakes Assessment). education, and research.
This guide does not address marine
blooms that occur in coastal and estuarine environments in New York. Many of the
concepts discussed here could be used in the future to address blooms in these
waters. Marine blooms are currently tracked and reported through the DEC Marine
Biotoxin Monitoring Program.
This guide outlines the DEC HABs Program elements that are under the explicit or
assumed authority of DEC but includes references to those elements assumed by
the NYSDOH and/or the New York OPRHP.
The primary intended audience for this guide is state agency staff who are directly
involved in implementing or work with the DEC HABs Program; the surveillance and
monitoring partners described in this document; and those members of the public
interested in background information about the development and implications of the
HABs program.
2.3. Background
New York State has an abundance of water resources, both flowing and ponded.
HABs are most commonly observed in ponded waters, although blooms have been
documented in several streams and rivers. There is no formal legal definition of a
lake, but by most common measures, there are between 7,500 and 16,000 ponded
2 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
waters in New York. Lakes are heavily used and enjoyed by New Yorkers for a wide
variety of purposes including recreation and as surface drinking water supplies.
DOW is tasked with protecting and
What do HABs look like?
conserving the water resources of
Know it!
New York. This mission is achieved
Cyanobacteria HABs can have a variety of
through a variety of programs and
appearances such as scattered green dots
activities. The primary function of
in the water, long, linear green streaks, pea
the DOW’s Bureau of Water
soup or spilled paint appearance, or blue-
Assessment and Management
green or white coloration. For more info:
http://www.dec.ny.gov/chemical/81962.html (BWAM) is to monitor and assess
waterbodies of the state to
determine whether they are supporting their best intended uses such as potable
water, public bathing, and recreation. BWAM programs address the mission of the
DOW and identify water quality issues of concern in New York waterbodies
One such challenge that has become increasingly prevalent throughout New York
are HABs. HABs in freshwater generally consist of cyanobacteria (also referred to as
blue-green algae). Cyanobacteria are naturally present in low numbers in most
marine and freshwater systems, but under certain conditions (particularly high
nutrients and warm temperatures) these organisms can begin to multiply rapidly and
form blooms. Cyanobacteria, which are like algae, possess chlorophyll and are
capable of photosynthesis. Several taxa have the potential to produce toxins.
Whether toxins are present or not, exposure to any cyanobacterial blooms can
cause health effects in people and animals when water with blooms is touched,
swallowed, or when airborne droplets are inhaled.
Although HABs have been observed for
What if you see a bloom?
many decades, recent high-profile blooms
Avoid it! Report it!
throughout the world and in New York
People, pets and livestock should
have increased the need for enhanced
avoid contact with water that is
education, documentation, and reporting of
discolored or has algal scums on the
blooms. Since 2012, HABs have been
surface. If a bloom is present, do not
documented in several hundred use the water and report to DEC
waterbodies in New York, and it is likely using the Suspicious Algal Bloom
the true extent of bloom occurrence is Report Form: on.ny.gov/habform
substantially greater. It is not yet known if
recent increases in bloom frequency and duration reflect changing environmental
conditions or are a result of improved reporting and monitoring of their occurrence.
Many New York waterbodies are regularly monitored through formal monitoring
programs. Over 200 lakes are sampled each year through two DEC ambient lake
monitoring programs: The Citizens Statewide Lake Assessment Program (CSLAP)
and the DEC Lake Classification and Inventory Program (LCI). In recent years, both
programs expanded to include significant HABs monitoring components. Most other
3 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
HABs surveillance or sampling is done on individual waterbodies by agency staff,
researchers, consultants, trained volunteers or as part of special studies. As
described below, several partnerships have been established by DEC in recent
years in response to increased public concern about HABs.
HABs exposure in New York has resulted in several dog deaths, public swimming
beach closures, and have at times compromised drinking and recreational water
uses. In response, a HABs program within DOW was developed to address blooms
in New York. Program staff facilitate bloom surveillance, sampling, and timely
communication between state agencies and the public. Further objectives of the
DEC HABs Program include education, documentation of blooms, and research that
can reduce HABs or link algal blooms to nutrient concentrations or other causes
2.4. Agency Responsibilities
The DEC HABs Program consists of DEC staff within DOW, BWAM. The current
structure of the DEC HABs Program relies on partnerships with state agencies and a
wide range of external partners and seeks to provide a unified approach to HABs
identification and communication in New York.
Many of the responsibilities of the DEC HABs Program described in this guide fall
within the authority of DEC under the Federal Clean Water Act (CWA). NYSDOH
and OPRHP have separate statutory responsibility for protecting public health. For
example, NYSDOH developed a HABs protocol for swimming beaches under the
authority of the State Sanitary Code (SSC). This protocol is used by local entities to
make decisions regarding HABs in regulated swimming areas. Oversite of drinking
water supplies is the responsibility of the NYSDOH under the federal Safe Drinking
Water Act (SDWA) and the SSC.
DEC coordinates additional HABs surveillance, monitoring and outreach with several
agencies and partners (Table 2.1, Figure 2.1). This guide can and should be used to
support those agencies and their efforts. Several large waterbodies in New York
(notably Lake Erie, Lake Ontario, Lake Champlain, New York City drinking water
reservoirs, and Alleghany Reservoir) have HAB management plans in place that are
overseen by a jurisdiction other than DEC. Below is a summary of the roles of the
major government entities that manage inland waterbodies and HABs in New York.
DEC
DEC programmatic functions and activities support the agency mission in
compliance with the CWA and state Environmental Conservation Law and are
structured to provide environmental and health protection throughout the state.
Several DEC roles that relate to HABs include:
• DEC HABs Program:
o Coordinate HABs surveillance and sampling statewide. Track and record
bloom reports received from DEC regional and field staff, NYSDOH, OPRHP,
federal agencies, the public, CSLAP, LCI and other HABs programs. The
4 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
program assigns bloom status, receives and interprets lab results and
provides information about blooms through education and outreach materials.
o Maintain contractual relationships with analytical labs for HAB sample
analysis.
o Prepare and issue updates on bloom status from May to October on the DEC
HABs website. Maintain an online interactive map of bloom notifications from
May-October (NYHABS).
o Maintain an inter-agency database of report locations and preliminary
laboratory results.
o Maintain a drop box for HABs inquiries: HABsInfo@dec.ny.gov.
o Publish results of findings in DEC reports, individual lake reports and other
formats.
• Conduct statewide lake monitoring programs (LCI and CSLAP) and managing
most lake-related public outreach (BWAM staff).
• Report blooms through NYHABS as they are encountered in the field (DEC field
staff).
A HABs coordinator is assigned in each DEC region. Some coordinators serve
primarily as conduits to the central office by sharing bloom reports, press inquiries,
and other programmatic requests. Other coordinators and regional staff take a more
active role, such as sample collection and follow up evaluation of publicly reported
blooms.
NYSDOH
NYSDOH programs and activities support their mission to comply with the SDWA
and Public Health Law to oversee public health protection at regulated sites. Several
NYSDOH roles that relate to the DEC HABs Program include:
• Oversee monitoring at PWS through their statutory responsibility as part of the
1974 SDWA and SSC within the source water protection program.
• Responsible for the development and distribution of beach protocols at all
regulated bathing beaches, including many children’s camps. Staff report HAB
occurrences and regulated bathing beach closures via NYHABS.
• Support the DEC HABs Program in the form of surveillance or sampling
assistance, often conducted by staff at LHDs.
• Support PWS sampling and regulated swimming area monitoring at the
Wadsworth Laboratory in Albany. The lab possesses analytical capabilities to
analyze toxins, perform microscopic analyses, and conduct quantitative
polymerase chain reaction analysis.
• Maintain an email for HABs inquiries: harmfulalgae@health.ny.gov
• Produce public outreach materials, a blue-green algae website and brochures.
• Investigate reports of human illnesses that may be related to HABs. Analyze
human health data related to epidemiological issues and provide technical advice
on public health aspects of HABs.
• Coordinate interagency communication with LHDs, the NYC Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene and NYSDOH Regional and District Offices.
5 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
County health departments perform environmental health functions in most New
York counties; NYSDOH District Offices provide the environmental functions in those
counties that do not. These offices, collectively known as LHDs, implement PWS
and beach outreach and monitor programs, include the deployment of beach
protocols and make final determinations about beach closures. Some county or
District Office staff may post closure or advisory signs, issue press releases, and
dedicate staff to investigate blooms reported by the public.
OPRHP- Division of Environmental Stewardship and Planning
• Manage regulated swimming areas and lake or river access points at state parks.
• Provide training on HABs identification and response protocols to parks’ staff.
• Conduct visual surveillance of beach conditions in support of beach closure
decisions. Report HABs occurrences and bathing beach closures via NYHABS.
• Provide outreach and education to park patrons through a HABs brochure.
• Conduct periodic water quality monitoring and wastewater system surveys to
evaluate causes of HABs in state parks’ lakes and ponds.
Federal and Other Agencies
• USEPA: conduct research, organizing educational webinars and meetings, and
creating federal regulations and advisory guidelines regarding HABs.
• NOAA: Oversee sampling and response to HABs in Lake Erie and Lake Ontario.
• USACE: Monitor HABs and provide regular updates to the DEC HABs Program
regarding Alleghany Reservoir.
• Vermont DEC and VDH: Oversee a public-private monitoring partnership in Lake
Champlain, including phytoplankton enumeration and toxin analysis; providing
regular updates to the DEC HABs Program.
• NYCDEP: Oversee water quality monitoring in NYC reservoirs; report HABs
occurrences via NYHABS.
Table 2.1 Summary of state agency programmatic responsibilities
DEC
NYSDOH
OPRHP
HABs Other & LHDs
LCI CSLAP
Program DEC Staff
Surveillance & Monitoring
Surveillance      
Sampling      
Analysis  * 
Outreach
Public health 
Beach closures  
Email drop box  
Use NYHABS    
HABs website  
Respond to public inquiries    
*microscopy only
6 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
Figure 2.1 Summary of organization roles, interest groups, and exposure groups that are served
by the DEC HABs Program.
7 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
3. DEC Bloom Status Designation in New York
3.1. Bloom Status Criteria
Bloom reports and lab data from a wide variety of sources (Table 3.1) are received
and interpreted by DEC HABs Program staff who then designate a bloom status for
each report. The DEC HABs Program has adopted a combination of visual
surveillance and a surrogate measure for cyanobacteria density (specifically, the
portion of total chlorophyll that can be fluoroscopically attributed to cyanobacteria,
known as blue-green chlorophyll or BG Chl.a), and toxin concentration to determine
bloom status. A decision tree process can be followed to determine bloom status
(Figure 3.1).
There were several factors that led the DEC HABs Program to adopt the current
bloom status criteria: (a) the need for rapid analysis and reporting turnaround time,
(b) a suitable way to evaluate a high volume of reports and samples from a large
number of waterbodies, (c) limited analytical capabilities associated with microscopic
enumeration or taxonomic evaluations, (d) lags in completion of toxin analysis, and
(e) a need to distinguish cyanobacteria HABs from other types of algal blooms less
likely to produce toxins.
The DEC HABs Program has working relationships with several analytical labs that
can analyze HABs samples. DEC utilizes the following analytical parameters to
determine bloom status and evaluate HABs over time: total microcystins, algal
pigment concentrations, and algal community composition via microscopy.
For total microcystins analysis, laboratories must be certified through the
Environmental Laboratory Approval Program (ELAP). For more information go to:
https://www.wadsworth.org/regulatory-programs/regulatory-
programs/environmental-laboratory-approval-program/microcystin
8 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
The DEC HABs Program has established four levels of bloom status:
No Bloom: Applied to a HAB report evaluated by DEC HABs Program or NYSDOH
staff to have a low likelihood of a cyanobacteria bloom present. At least one of the
following criteria must be met: (1) visual evidence is not consistent with a
cyanobacteria bloom; (2) BG chlorophyll levels ≤ 25 µg/L; (3) microscopic indication
that sample is not dominated by cyanobacteria or not present in bloom-like density;
or (4) total microcystins ≤ 4 µg/L (only in absence of the previous criteria being met).
Suspicious Bloom: Applied to any HAB report received that DEC or NYSDOH staff
are unable to determine conclusively as a cyanobacteria bloom because photos
were not provided, or the report was otherwise inconclusive.
Confirmed Bloom: Applied to a HAB report received from the public or a trained
participant in a HAB reporting program that DEC or NYSDOH staff determine, based
on digital photographs or a descriptive field report, is a cyanobacteria bloom; OR
HAB report received by DEC with associated laboratory analytical results from a
sampled bloom, that meet the following criteria: (1) BG chlorophyll levels ≥ 25 µg/L;
(2) microscopic confirmation that majority of sample is cyanobacteria and in absence
of chlorophyll value, at a density indicative of bloom conditions; (3) only in absence
of the previous criteria being met: total microcystins ≥ 4 µg/L but ˂ 20 µg/L and
digital photographs or a descriptive field report.
Confirmed with High Toxins Bloom: Applied to a HAB report received by DEC
with associated laboratory analytical results from a sampled bloom, that meet the
criteria of a Confirmed Bloom AND any of the following criteria: (1) total microcystins
≥ 20 µg/L (shoreline samples only); (2) total microcystins ≥ 10 µg/L (open water
samples only); (3) DEC and NYSDOH staff determine potential risk of exposure to
anatoxin or another cyanotoxin.
9 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
Figure 3.1 Decision tree that indicates the process by which DEC HABs Program staff
determine the status of a potential bloom; updated in 2020.
10 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
11
|
DEC
HABS
PROGRAM
GUIDE
-
Version
3
Table 3.1 Summary of the types of information regarding HABs that are received by the DEC HABs Program and descriptions of how this
information is used to determine bloom status; updated in 2020.
Connection to
Type of Information Explanation Format Sources Bloom Status
Criteria
Online Report Form, or Can be used to
Visual/Field Report (Lay Description of a suspected
email to DEC or NYSDOH Public designate a Suspicious
person) algal bloom
drop box, phone calls or Confirmed Bloom
Visual/Field Report (Trained
Description of an algal NY Agency staff, CSLAP Can be used to
personnel: DEC or NYSDOH Received through NYHABS
bloom, with location, extent, volunteers, HABs program designate a Confirmed
staff or reporting program Report Forms
etc. partners Bloom
participant)
Public, DEC or NYSDOH
Digital photographs files Can be used to
Photographs of an algal staff, CSLAP volunteers,
Digital Photograph received through NYHABS designate a Confirmed
bloom in an electronic format other HABs program
Report Forms Bloom
partners
Only received for
Numerical count of algal Numerical data sent from Alleghany Reservoir Can be used to
Quantitative
abundance present in external HABs programs to (USACE), Lake Champlain designate a Confirmed
Phytoplankton Count
samples DEC HABs Program (VT DEC), NYC reservoirs Bloom*
(NYCDEP)
Narrative describing the
Narrative data sent from labs Can be used to
phytoplankton community Partner labs or DEC HABs
Qualitative Microscopy to DEC HABs Program or as designate a Confirmed
composition present in water Program staff
analyzed by DEC staff Bloom
samples
Extracted Chlorophyll a or
Can be used to
Pigment/chlorophyll Fluoroprobe chlorophyll Numerical data sent from
Partner labs designate a Confirmed
Concentration concentrations (µg/L) labs to DEC HABs Program
Bloom
present in water samples
Concentrations of Can be used to
Toxin Concentration Numerical data sent from ELAP certified labs for
cyanotoxins (µg/L) present in designate a Confirmed
labs to DEC HABs Program total microcystins
water samples with High Toxins Bloom
*Cell counts are interpolated using the WHO recreation guidelines (Table 3.2)
If an algal bloom report does not include
Recommended HAB Actions
enough information to determine a bloom
status (for example, a written description • Know it! Avoid it! Report it!
from a member of the public and/or digital • Keep children and pets away
photographs that are of insufficient quality from scums or discolored water
to determine if a bloom is cyanobacteria- • Seek immediate medical
dominated), a place-holding status (Needs assistance for symptoms
Evaluation) was used internally in 2019. consistent with exposure
Beginning in 2020, the term Suspicious • Report any symptoms to local or
Bloom was used for the same function.
state NYSDOH
• Report blooms to DEC
A report will remain categorized as a
Suspicious Bloom until additional
information are received. When photos or lab results are received, they are
evaluated following the criteria described above. If the digital photos, field report or
lab results indicate that a cyanobacteria HAB is not present, the report is designated
as No Bloom. If the photos indicate cyanobacteria HAB conditions or sample results
meet the BG Chl.a threshold, the report will be designated as a Confirmed Bloom. A
report of a Confirmed Bloom can later be changed to a Confirmed with High Toxins
Bloom if the toxin threshold is exceeded.
A HAB sample only reflects the conditions at a single space and time and cannot be
assumed with any certainty to reflect lasting conditions in an entire section of
shoreline, or a whole waterbody. An individual sample may or may not reflect the
highest densities of cyanobacteria or cyanotoxins present in a waterbody.
3.2. Threshold Development
The DEC HABs Program bloom status criteria rely on a combination of visual
assessment, pigment concentration (BG Chl.a), toxin concentrations and
professional judgment (Figure 3.1). In the absence of accepted federal guidelines on
exposure to cyanotoxins in recreational waters, the DEC HABs Program has based
bloom status criteria on an adaptation of the WHO guidance values for moderate risk
of acute health effects from recreational exposure to harmful algal blooms (Table
3.2). WHO recommends the use of cyanobacteria cell counts to trigger alert and
advisory systems and cites chlorophyll a or toxins as suitable alternative alert or
advisory triggers. The DEC HABs Program interprets the WHO chlorophyll a
guidance values based on fluoroprobes to rapidly detect cyanobacteria-specific
pigments (BG Chl.a). A benchtop FluoroProbe (bbe moldaenke©) can be used to
rapidly quantify relative quantities of algal pigments using fluorescence
spectroscopy.
12 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
Table 3.2 WHO guidance values for the relative probability of health effects resulting from
exposure to cyanobacteria blooms and microcystin
Relative
Probability of Cyanobacteria Microcystin-LR Chlorophyll-a
Acute Health (cells/mL) (µg/L) (µg/L)
Effects
Low <20,000 <10 <10
Moderate 20,000-100,000 10-20 10-50
100,000-
High 20-2,000 50-5,000
10,000,000
Very High >10,000,000 >2,000 >5,000
For the first few years of the DEC HABs Program, the WHO guideline (10-50 µg/L of
chlorophyll-a and a description of cyanobacteria “dominance”) was interpreted by
DEC to be ≥ 25 to 30 µg/L BG Chl.a and ≥ 50% of the algal community comprised of
cyanobacteria. Beginning in 2018, DEC adopted a BG chlorophyll threshold of 25
µg/L BG Chl.a and qualitative assessment of amount of cyanobacteria within a
bloom under a microscope to verify “dominance.”
In 2020, DEC broadened Confirmed Bloom status definition to be applied to visual
reports (previously designated a Suspicious Bloom). The use of visual reports to
confirm a HAB is consistent with DOH protocols for closing regulated swimming
areas. As of 2020, the Suspicious Bloom status is applied to HAB reports that
cannot be confirmed to be a HAB by DEC because photos were not provided, or the
reports were inconclusive.
The DEC HABs Program uses pigment analyses (Chl.a) and visual observations
(photos) as the primary information to determine bloom status and advisory
language. This information can be evaluated more quickly than toxin data; this
ensures that bloom reports are communicated to the public rapidly. Suspicious or
Confirmed bloom status does not ensure that toxins are not present, but simply that
the analytical information available did not indicate toxins were above the High
Toxins threshold. DEC recommends that all HABs should be avoided, regardless of
toxin data, because cyanobacteria HABs can produce other harmful compounds
such as dermal irritants and other uncharacterized or unmeasured toxins.
Outreach messaging and avoidance language used by DEC and DOH are
comparable for all waterbodies, regardless of bloom status.
3.3. Cyanotoxins and Other Harmful Compounds
There are three potential exposure routes for humans and animals to cyanotoxins
and other cyanobacteria compounds: dermal, ingestion, or inhalation of aerosolized
toxins.
13 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
Exposure may occur during:
• recreation
• fishing
• household use of untreated or in-home treated surface waters when there is
a bloom
• consumption of water that contains cyanobacteria or cyanotoxins
Exposure to high levels of HABs and cyanotoxins may cause:
• diarrhea
• nausea or vomiting
• skin, eye or throat irritation
• allergic reactions
• breathing difficulties
The mechanisms that produce cyanotoxin and conditions for toxin release are not
well understood and the relationship between algal biomass and toxin concentration
is not clear. Presently, the analytical methods available to detect cyanotoxins are
expensive and require sophisticated laboratory equipment and trained analysts.
There are several types of techniques to detect cyanotoxins or the potential for
cyanotoxin production in samples including biological assays, chromatographic
methods, or genetic methods.
The most common cyanotoxin detected by the DEC HABs Program is microcystin;
anatoxin-a is detected less frequently. These cyanotoxins are listed on the USEPA’s
fourth Contaminant Candidate List. However, additional cyanotoxins and other
bloom-related compounds may be of concern for public health risks.
Microcystins
Microcystin is the most commonly detected cyanotoxin. Microcystin is produced by
several genera of cyanobacteria. There are more than 100 congeners (forms) of
microcystin which are collectively referred to as total microcystins.
The Confirmed with High Toxin Bloom criteria is based on a 10 µg/L (open water)
and 20 µg/L (shoreline) threshold for total microcystins. These values were derived
from the WHO criteria moderate risk thresholds (Table 3.2).
For assessment purposes, EPA recommends that an exceedance during a 10-day,
non-rolling assessment period is considered an excursion and that no more than 3
excursions should occur during a recreation season and that if that pattern reoccurs
in more than 1 year, it may indicate that the waterbody is not supporting recreational
uses. New York continues to evaluate EPA’s values , in the context of the DEC
bloom status criteria which is intended to be protective for recreational use of
waterbodies.
Anatoxin-a
Anatoxin-a is one of several alkaloid neurotoxins produced by some types of
cyanobacteria. Several incidents of pet and livestock poisonings have been reported
14 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
after exposure to cyanobacterial blooms. Symptoms of exposure from animal case
reports include staggering, paralysis, muscle twitching, gasping, convulsions, and
death. Dogs are at risk of exposure to cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins through
grooming of their fur and dose response effect related to their relative body mass.
Given the lack of federal guidance and wide variations in individual state advisory
values, the DEC HABs Program has not adopted a specific Confirmed with High
Toxin threshold for anatoxin-a. This toxin is not detected often in water samples in
New York State, because the toxin degrades rapidly in sunlight making anatoxin-a
detection a monitoring and analytical challenge.
Cylindrospermopsin
Cylindrospermopsin is produced by several kinds of cyanobacteria, commonly
encountered in New York, however, this toxin is rarely detected in water samples
analyzed by the DEC HABs Program. DEC does not have a Confirmed with High
Toxins Bloom threshold for cylindrospermopsin.
Other Cyanotoxins and Harmful Compounds
Cyanobacteria have been shown to produce a wide range of additional compounds
that have not been thoroughly identified or studied. The rapidly changing landscape
of the research regarding cyanotoxins and cyanobacterial blooms supports an
overall policy of caution and avoidance of blooms by the public. Due to lack of
published data, absence federal guidelines, and low rates of occurrence of other
cyanotoxins in New York the DEC HABs Program only has bloom status thresholds
for total microcystins.
Additional information regarding HABs and health can be found at: DOH Blue-green
Algae and Health webpage.
4. Bloom Reporting: HABs Documentation by DEC
4.1. Surveillance & Sampling: Two approaches
HABs are reported to the DEC HABs Program through two general mechanisms:
Surveillance
Bloom surveillance is a visual evaluation of lake conditions; a water sample may or
may not be collected or analyzed. Reports may be a single observation reported by
a member of the public to DEC by phone, an email to HABsinfo@dec.ny.gov, and/or
the submission of a Suspicious Algal Bloom Report Form (see Section 7.2), or other
communication which may or may not include digital photographs. DEC, NYSDOH,
LHDs and OPRHP staff send in reports either generated by their own surveillance or
after receiving reports from the public. Surveillance is conducted by external partner
programs (e.g., local lake programs, lake communities, volunteer groups, and parks)
that commit to routine surveillance at specific waterbodies. Participants in these
15 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
programs typically complete a trained user report form provided by the DEC HABs
Program. The form collects information about field conditions. Surveillance reports
may be used to designate a bloom as Suspicious.
NYSDOH has established protocols to close regulated beaches based on visual
surveillance (see Section 4.2). If a beach manager believes that conditions within the
swimming beach fit the description of a HAB, the manager will prohibit swimming,
wading and other water contact. If these conditions are not apparent on the beach
but are observed or reported on the waterbody near the beach, the manager may
post advisory signs. This protocol has been adopted by NYSDOH, NYSDEC and
OPRHP for regulated swimming beaches. HABs-related beach closures were
considered by DEC to be Suspicious Blooms prior to 2020. Beginning in 2020, they
were designated as Confirmed Blooms.
Sampling
HAB samples are collected due a bloom report or based on pre-determined
sampling program protocols. HABs samples, particularly when paired with water
quality testing, can provide valuable data that may be used to better understand
long-term patterns in geographic extent, toxicity, duration, and other characteristics
of blooms in a waterbody. Analytical results from a sample can be used to designate
a Confirmed Bloom or Confirmed with High Toxins Bloom.
The DEC HABs Program works with several partners to conduct structured
surveillance and/or sampling programs throughout the state; these programs are
described in more detail below. Sampling supports and supplements overall
statewide surveillance efforts and increases the likelihood of rapid observation and
public notification of bloom occurrence. Although monitoring plan details (number,
frequency, and types of samples analyzed) differ among partners, they generally
consist of the following:
• A trained member or affiliate of the partner organization (volunteer, employee, or
agency worker) observes waterbody conditions. Surveys are usually conducted
by a person familiar with the waterbody. Training helps improve the likelihood
that algal blooms are correctly identified in the field and that reports of non-
cyanobacteria blooms are minimized.
• Trained users are provided a Trained User Report Form to submit bloom reports
to the DEC HABs Program.
• Samples are usually collected from the densest portion of the bloom (the “worst
case scenario”) to be as protective as possible regarding exposure risk.
• Samples are collected and sent to a contracted partner laboratory to be analyzed
for phytoplankton community composition via microscopy, pigment concentration,
and toxins (See Chapter 3 for more detail).
• Some programs report and/or sample only when visible scums or blooms occur
(episodic). Other programs perform these tasks on a regular basis, regardless of
16 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
the visual state of the waterbody (routine). Some programs follow a combination
of these protocols.
4.2. HABs Monitoring and Reporting in New York
The Lake Classification and Inventory Program (LCI):
The DEC DOW Lake Management and Assessment Section conducts lake water
quality sampling through the LCI Program. Data collected by LCI are used to monitor
long term trends in New York State’s ponded waters as well as to support water
quality management functions within DOW including the development of Clean
Water Plans, source water protection plans, nutrient criteria, and updates to the
Waterbody Inventory /Priority Waterbodies List. Waterbodies that are selected for
sampling are grouped by drainage basin and follow the five-year RIBS schedule.
The waterbodies selected each year generally have limited historical data or a
potential water quality problem. A full suite of field data and laboratory water quality
parameters (profiles, water chemistry, Secchi depth, etc.) are collected during
sampling events. This program was developed to characterize overall water quality
conditions, not necessarily HAB occurrences. When a HAB is encountered during
sampling events, digital photographs and water samples are collected and submitted
to NYHABS.
The Citizens Statewide Lake Assessment Program (CSLAP):
CSLAP is a volunteer lake sampling and education program that is jointly managed
by DEC and NYSFOLA. Over 250 lake associations and 2,000 volunteers have
participated in CSLAP since its inception. The program has delivered high quality
data to many DEC programs for over 30 years. Annually, about 120 lakes
throughout the state participate in the program. CSLAP supports sampling by
resident members of lake associations that apply to participate in CSLAP through
their affiliation with NYSFOLA. A full suite of water quality parameters is measured
throughout the summer months from each lake. Samples are collected from a single
open water site (the deepest part of the lake); HABs surveys are conducted
periodically at all lakes and on each sampling date for lakes prone to HABs.
Shoreline HABs surveys can lead to episodic HABs reports and sampling if a
shoreline scum is observed between scheduled sampling events.
Lake-specific Professional and Semi-professional Reporting Programs:
Several lake communities have developed structured HAB reporting programs in
response to annually recurring HABs. These programs have been developed in
cooperation with DEC and other partners. The programs vary in structure, but most
involve leveraging existing analytical partnerships and local organizational
frameworks. Most programs only report HABs while a few monitor further water
quality parameters in addition.
NYC and Long Island Enhanced HAB Reporting:
17 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
The NYC Department of Parks and Recreation and researchers at Stony Brook
University oversee a hybrid sampling, reporting and research partnership for
waterbodies within New York City parks and Long Island. Routine reporting and/or
sampling is conducted on lakes with persistent blooms and episodic reporting is
conducted on other lakes with HABs as they are observed.
New York State OPRHP DESP:
Division of Environmental Stewardship and Planning (DESP) staff work closely with
DEC and NYSDOH to provide outreach to State Park managers and staff on how to
recognize and respond to HABs. A formal reporting protocol has been defined by
DESP through consultation with DEC and NYSDOH. Routine surveillance is
conducted by individual beach or State Park managers at parks with waterbodies
that are prone to HABs. That information is reported to central DESP staff, who then
communicate information to DEC and NYSDOH. When the bloom is at a bathing
beach, State Park managers, in consultation with DESP, can make the decision
whether to close or reopen a beach, in compliance with NYSDOH beach closure
protocols.
Regulated Swimming Beaches:
Bathing beaches are regulated by NYSDOH District Offices, County Health
Departments, the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, or
operated by OPRHP, and DEC in accordance with the SSC. The SSC contains
qualitative water quality requirements for protection from HABs. NYSDOH developed
an interactive intranet tool that provides guidance to County, City and State District
NYSDOH staff to standardize the process for identifying blooms, closing beaches,
sampling, reopening beaches and reporting activities. The protocol uses a visual
assessment to initiate beach closures as it affords a more rapid response than
sampling and analysis. Beaches are reopened when a bloom dissipates (visually)
and samples collected the following day confirm the bloom has dissipated and show
toxin levels are below 4 µg/L microcystin. Sample analyses are conducted at an
ELAP certified laboratory.
Lake Champlain:
HABs surveillance and sampling in Lake Champlain is coordinated by joint efforts
among the VT DEC, VDH, LCBP, and LCC. Over 50 trained citizen monitors conduct
shoreline surveys at locations throughout the lake in both Vermont and New York.
Additionally, VT DEC staff conduct sampling at 15 fixed sites (both shoreline and
open water). Samples are evaluated following a tiered alert protocol. Results are
posted online in the VDH Blue Green Algae Tracker interactive map; DEC provides
a link on the HABs notification page.
Great Lakes (Lake Erie and Lake Ontario):
18 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
There is no basin-wide defined HABs response or management plan for the Great
Lakes that border New York. NOAA and DEC respond to concerns and issues
related to HABs on Lake Erie or Lake Ontario on an episodic basis, including reports
of blooms from embayments.
Episodic HABs Surveillance and Sampling by DEC and LHD Staff:
DEC and LHD staff occasionally conduct site visits in response to bloom reports
from the public. While at the waterbody, they assess if a bloom is cyanobacteria
based on visual appearance and determine whether sample collection is warranted.
Site visits are often triggered by phone calls, emails or suspicious algal bloom
Report Forms submitted by the public to DEC and/or NYSDOH. A shortage of staff
to conduct this on-demand sampling has led to the development of the programs
described above.
Episodic HABs Reporting by the Public:
The public often encounter algal blooms and report their findings to the DEC HABs
Program. These reports include phone calls, emails, or completion of a Suspicious
Algal Bloom Report Form (See Section 5.2). Occasionally, DEC HABs Program staff
will request that members of the public conduct follow up surveillance as deemed
appropriate; this facilitates tracking the duration and size of the bloom.
5. Outreach
A critical component of the DEC HABs program is outreach: communication of
information about HABs and the results of surveillance and sampling programs to inform
public decisions about recreational choices.
5.1. Communication to Collaborators
The communication process begins when a report of a potential bloom is submitted
to NYHABS. This report includes digital photographs and a description of the bloom
and/or a sample collection. These reports are primarily submitted through the
Suspicious Algal Bloom Report Form or the Trained User Report Form. In addition,
phone calls or emails may be received directly by DEC, NYSDOH or LHDs. Partner
analytical laboratories send HAB sample results to DEC. If sample results indicate a
HAB is present, a record will be included in the New York HABs System (NYHABS).
NYHABS is the comprehensive data management system used to communicate with
interagency staff, collaborators and the public regarding HABs.
Because of the public health risks related to HABs exposure, staff work to transmit
relevant information as quickly as possible. Rapid and broad-reaching responses
rely on the use of NYHABS and DEC HABs website by state agency staff.
NYHABS Data Elements
19 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
NYHABS facilitates the collection of field and lab reports into a single data storage
location. Records from the two Survey123 Report Forms and data from analytical
laboratories contribute to the interpreted status of a HAB report. A number of these
elements are included on NYHABS, and include:
• Waterbody
• Date of Observation
• HAB Status (see section 3.1)
• Extent
• Data Provider
• County
• Attachments (photos)
The Extent of a Bloom Attachments
Extent is a rough estimate of the size of Photos help agency staff determine if or
the bloom within the waterbody. where to conduct any follow up
investigations. If digital photographs
Small Localized: Bloom affects a small
received with a bloom report meet the
area of the waterbody, limited from one
criteria of a HAB, they will be included in
to several neighboring properties.
NYHABS. Raw data are available for
Large Localized: Bloom affects many state agency staff and provide support for
properties within an entire cove, along the bloom status designation and are
a large segment of the shoreline, or in disseminated with the recognition that
a specific region of the waterbody. state agency staff are able to properly
interpret the information. These data are
Widespread/Lakewide: Bloom affects
not included on the DEC HABs website or
the entire waterbody, a large portion of
NYHABS.
the lake, or most to all of the shoreline.
5.2. DEC HABs Webpages
Open Water: Sample was collected
near the center of the lake and may DEC’s website has several informative
indicate that the bloom is widespread, HABs webpages: a landing page, a
and conditions may be worse along notifications page, an archive page, a
shorelines or within recreational areas. photo gallery of HABs and non-HABs
Special precautions should be taken in algal blooms, and additional information
situations when a Confirmed with High about HABs. The content of these pages
is updated periodically. The notifications
Toxins Bloom is reported with an Open
page includes a link to NYHABS.
Water extent because toxins are likely
NYHABS is updated throughout the
to be even higher in shoreline areas.
season (late May through October). On
the archive page, there is information about HABs data from previous years.
The DEC HABs Program established a public notification system in 2012, as part of
an on-going agency effort to improve public reporting and outreach regarding
environmental hazards. The HABs notification program is intended to improve public
20 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
awareness about this pressing environmental issue, improve transparency regarding
information collected by DEC monitoring and reporting programs. NYHABS serves
to assist the public in making informed decisions about recreation and other water
uses. The structure of some features of the pages reflects DEC rules, requirements
and limitations associated with current web page formats.
Notifications Page
The page includes a statewide map of waterbodies with current HABs reports. The
map has locations of current reports of Suspicious, Confirmed, or Confirmed with
High Toxin Blooms within the last two weeks (Figure 5.1).
Bloom status designations are intended to
Updates to Bloom Status
be sufficiently protective for public health
without requiring interpretation of analytical The DEC HABs Program and its
data. partners consistently seek current
information to provide the most up-
Archive Page
to-date bloom notifications. Attempts
are made to update the status of
The page includes links to downloadable
blooms with more recent reports.
PDFs of tables with bloom information from
Information gathering is done by
previous years. Each table includes all
email requests for updates and/or site
waterbodies for which a bloom was
visits by DEC and NYSDOH staff.
documented in a year. Waterbodies that
CSLAP samplers and other DEC
were cited as having a Suspicious Bloom partners usually conduct surveillance
that was later determined not to be a bloom in 1-3-week intervals, allowing for
are not included. For each cited waterbody, routine updates. However, the
the first and last report dates and the frequency of bloom reporting can be
cumulative duration of the blooms are sporadic and decreases after the
routine sampling season ends, even if
included. A cumulative archive showing all
some blooms persist into the fall.
waterbodies with reported blooms since
2012 is available for download.
21 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
Figure 5.1 Example of the statewide map of HABs locations that is displayed on the DEC HABs
notifications page through NYHABS.
5.3. Additional Outreach Efforts
Pamphlets, flyers, and other published informative documents play an important role
in educating the public about HABs in New York. Outreach materials provide
precautionary information that instructs readers to be aware of HABs and may
include additional instructions about exposure risk, likely symptoms, how to report
blooms and appropriate steps to take if exposed to HABs. In outreach materials, care
is taken to provide precautionary advice without triggering public alarm about risks,
particularly in large waterbodies with blooms found only at limited locations. The DEC
supports several outreach strategies:
Signs
• A warning sign was developed by DEC and NYSDOH for use by lake associations
or other parties at public access points (Available for download; see section 7.3).
• Limitations in personnel, resources, and logistics prevent DEC from being able to
post advisory notices at public access points on the large number of waterbodies
in New York that have documented HABs. The DEC HABs Program and
NYSDOH provide general guidance that instructs lake residents and visitors to be
on the lookout for blooms at any time once they have been documented for a
waterbody. This is based on the expectation that even vigilant surveillance might
22 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
not catch all blooms and that all lakes with previously confirmed blooms are highly
susceptible to future blooms.
Brochures and Pamphlets
• DEC developed a brochure specially focused on HABs in 2017.
• Some individual lake associations have developed HABs brochures for their
communities. The DEC HABs program often supports these initiatives with
feedback on content and by providing photographs that can be used.
• NYSDOH released a HABs brochure in 2016, which supplements a public FAQ
document that has been available since 2003.
Online
• During the summer notification period, a link to NYHABS is included in Making
Waves, DEC’s weekly email newsletter regarding water issues.
• During the summer notification period, weekly updates on the number of blooms
with a link to the Notifications page and additional information about blooms are
posted on DEC’s Facebook page and Twitter account.
• Members of the public can directly access the NYHABS Suspicious Algal Bloom
Report Form. Users are instructed to complete the form and submit it with digital
photographs.
• NYSDOH has maintained a HABs webpage since 2003. Several local health
department websites have specific HABs pages, some of which include real-time
information on local bloom status and beach closures.
Other
• Several state or regional agencies issue press releases to inform communities
about the potential risks associated with HABs. Some releases are issued
proactively in early summer in advance of the upcoming recreational season,
usually before any blooms are observed. Other press releases are issued during
bloom season or in response to a high-profile bloom. DEC HABs Program staff
write or contribute to these press releases on an as needed basis, usually at the
request of regional agency staff.
• DEC HABs Program staff regularly give presentations regarding HABs issues to a
variety of audiences including agency staff, individual lake associations, local
government, the public, training workshops and lake-related conferences.
• DEC HABs Program staff periodically provide articles or other educational
materials for publication in lake association newsletters, DEC’s Conservationist
magazine, peer reviewed literature, and other outreach methods.
• DEC HABs Program staff participate in regional and national HABs working
groups and share data and program development strategies with other states or
agencies.
5.4. DEC Monitoring Program Reporting
CSLAP Reports
23 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
Annual reports are issued to participating lake associations for every CSLAP lake.
All CSLAP lake reports completed since 1996 are posted on the NYSFOLA website
and the most recent year’s reports are posted on a DEC website. The reports
include annual and cumulative summaries of all CSLAP program information, with a
focus on physical and chemical water quality indicators. The analysis and reporting
of HABs-related information include the following:
• For each year of HABs sampling, graphs show seasonal distribution of algae
communities (as measured by total and component chlorophyll a) and
microcystin in open water and shoreline bloom samples
• Tabular summaries of total and component chlorophyll a and major toxins
(microcystin and anatoxin-a), including minimum, long term average, present
year average, and maximum values during the current year
• Narrative summaries of sampling results and a summary of microscopic analyses
• A comparison of fluoroprobe and toxin results to the DEC HABs thresholds for
Confirmed and Confirmed with High Toxins Blooms
LCI Reports
Summary reports are issued for LCI monitoring locations. The reports include annual
and cumulative summaries of all LCI program information, with a focus on physical
and chemical limnological indicators.
6. Methods for Bloom Prevention and Control
6.1. 2018 Governor’s HABs Initiative
At Governor Cuomo’s direction, DEC is leading a multi-agency, statewide $65-
million initiative to aggressively combat HABs and protect drinking water quality and
the economy. In 2018, four summits brought together national, state, and local
experts to discuss how to reduce the frequency of these blooms. Recordings from
the summits are available at: https://livestream.com/hvccstreaming/habssummits.
The summits drove the creation of Action Plans for 12 priority lakes, which will
undergo intensive evaluation and support mitigation efforts and advanced
technology pilots that can be applied to waterbodies across the state.
DEC initiated several mitigation pilot projects in 2018 on small waterbodies selected
for their history of documented HABs, nutrient levels, relative size, and uses. DEC is
assessing the data from these projects to determine the efficacy of future use of
these mitigation strategies, and to provide recommendations for additional work or
studies on the impact of innovative treatments for HABs.
In addition, in 2018 DEC began collaborating with the USGS Troy Water Science
Center, on an advanced HABs monitoring pilot on three Finger Lakes (Seneca,
24 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
Skaneateles, and Owasco Lakes) to comprehensively evaluate several of the
environmental factors that cause HABs to occur.
6.2. Bloom Prevention
Most research indicates that the primary cause of HABs is excessive nutrients
(phosphorus and nitrogen) so watershed management efforts should be targeted at
measures to reduce the input of phosphorus and nitrogen to waterbodies. Nutrient
reduction through watershed management strategies is the most effective method of
preventing eutrophication and potentially preventing blooms from occurring.
Numeric nutrient thresholds refer to an ambient phosphorus or nitrogen
concentration above which designated use impairments are documented or likely
occurring. The establishment of these nutrient thresholds continues to be an active
subject of research and data evaluation, as required by USEPA as part of the
numeric nutrient criteria development process.
The process by which numeric thresholds are established and promulgated to
protected designated uses in most waterbodies, including ponded and flowing
waters, is discussed in the DEC Nutrient Plan. Currently, New York has a narrative
standard for nutrients: none in amounts that will result in growths of algae, weeds
and slimes that will impair the waters for their best usages (6 NYSCRR Part 703.2).
An ambient water guidance value of 20 µg/L (0.020 mg/L) total phosphorus has
been developed for ponded waters (TOGS 1.1.1), in order to be protect aesthetics.
Additional research and data evaluation are on-going to identify appropriate
thresholds to protect primary and secondary contact recreation best uses. Site-
specific criteria may be needed for waterbodies with nutrient levels below the
thresholds and that have recurrent HABs.
Waterbodies exceeding these thresholds are identified by the DEC and USEPA as
impaired and are cited on the federal 303(d) list. For these waterbodies, monitoring
and/or modeling analysis are required to determine the primary source(s) of
nutrients. Then, a Clean Water Plan (a TMDL or a Nine Element Watershed Plan)
that identifies pollutant sources and strategies for reducing the nutrient loading from
these sources is developed for the waterbody.
In some waterbodies, the primary source of nutrients is discharge from a wastewater
treatment plant, referred to as a point source. In New York, most point source
discharges to lakes are associated with long-standing outfalls from small municipal
treatment plants to big lakes. Discharges to rivers are more common and HABs
have been documented on some large river systems.
DEC has been delegated authority by USEPA to regulate point source pollutant
discharges under the SPDES Permit Program. SPDES permits may authorize
phosphorus or nitrogen permit limits through a process that establishes nutrient
permit limits according to up-to-date wastewater treatment technologies and
25 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
practices (TOGS 1.3.6). This guidance considers both receiving and downstream
waters. Discharge limits are established to meet the point source pollutant
reductions necessary to bring ambient nutrient levels in the receiving waterbody
below the numeric nutrient thresholds described above.
In most impaired waterbodies in New York, nonpoint source pollution is the primary
source of nutrient inputs. The fundamental goal of the DEC Nonpoint Source (NPS)
Management Program is to encourage comprehensive management of nonpoint
pollutant sources in order to protect and conserve all waters of New York State for
beneficial uses. The NPS Program offers guidance and technical support through
the process of writing watershed plans, identifying best management practices, and
implementing planned actions that can control impacts from nonpoint sources.
Common preventative measures include targeted management of septic systems,
advanced wastewater treatment, reduced or eliminated use of lawn and agricultural
fertilizers, and stormwater management.
A detailed discussion of nutrient management activities is beyond the scope of this
document, but given limited resources and agencies’ regulatory reach, nutrient
management is largely conducted by a coalition of agencies, local officials, and lake
communities. Watershed management techniques for lake communities and lake
residents are discussed in Chapter 9 of the 2009 DEC publication Diet for a Small
Lake: the expanded guide to New York State lake and watershed management,
collaboratively written by DEC and NYSFOLA.
6.3. In-Lake Bloom Control Options
Efforts to minimize or eliminate the frequency of HABs should focus on prevention,
specifically the reduction of ambient waterbody nutrient concentrations. However,
the timeline for implementation and success of most preventative measures will
exceed a single bloom season. For many lake residents or lake communities, bloom
control must include managing the cause of blooms. Concurrent to the
implementation of prevention and nutrient management measures, there are some
steps to take to reduce the intensity or occurrence of blooms.
Algal blooms can be controlled using a variety of physical, chemical, or biological
strategies. A short summary of algae control measures that have been used or could
be considered for use in New York is provided in Table 6.1. Readers are
encouraged to learn more about in-lake control techniques on the USEPA control
and treatment website. The control measures discussed below are covered in much
greater detail in Chapter 7 of Diet for a Small Lake, Algae and Other Undesirables:
Getting Rid of Yuck. Many algal control measures require permits from DEC
Regional Environmental Permit Administrators, who should be consulted before any
algal control measure is implemented.
26 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
27
|
DEC
HABS
PROGRAM
GUIDE
-
Version
1
Table 6.1 Summary of water management techniques used for algal blooms, their effectiveness, DEC permitting requirements and relative cost.
Method Principle Pros Cons Limitations DEC Permits Cost
BIOLOGICAL CONTROL METHODS
Risk of disrupting fish
community or other
Manipulate trophic Once stocked, fish are Need to evaluate
unexpected
interactions by inconspicuous, may fisheries data on
consequences, highly Article 11 Highly variable;
Biomanipulation stocking piscivorous improve sports fishery, existing food web &
variable success rate, stocking permit $100-$2k/acre
fish to eat method is regarded as probable changes
assumes planktivorous
planktivorous fish “natural,” inexpensive related to manipulation
fish dominate lake food
web
Natural appearance, Limited history of use in
some evidence of NYS, may be unsightly or
Artificial wetlands success in small impact active recreation,
outcompete algae for ponds, other potential limited to small ponds or
Floating islands suspended nutrients; beneficial uses (such isolated portions of larger Not known Not known Not known
islands act as as acting as a nursery waterbodies, need to
nutrient sinks for terrestrial harvest islands to
plantings), a long-term prevent nutrients from
control strategy migrating back to water
CHEMICAL CONTROL METHODS
May have limited Article 15/Part
duration, potential non- 327, Article
Kill algal cells
target impacts, 17/SPDES
through cellular Immediate response, Highly variable,
controversial in some Some water quality General Permit
Algaecides toxicity (copper- long history of copper $5-25 per acre-
settings, cell lysing can restrictions needed, Article
based) or oxidation usage in NYS, scalable foot
spill toxins into water, 24 wetlands
(hydrogen peroxide)
spot treatment may be permit may be
difficult needed
Permitting issues, fish
Precipitate nutrients
Can have immediate toxicity in low pH lakes,
in water and/or seal
response & long-term public perception of Presently not allowed
nutrients in the
duration, may address chemical use, floc/sludge in NYS, but a
Nutrient sediment, primarily
significant internal removal if nutrients permitting approval Not presently $100 -
Precipitation with use of alum
nutrient sources, non- intercepted, may have method may be allowed >$500/acre
and Inactivation (aluminum sulfate),
pesticidal, may limited effectiveness in developed in the
PhosLock
minimize spillage of waterbodies that are not future.
(lanthanum-based),
toxins from HABs strongly stratified, high
or iron
cost
28
| DEC
HABS
PROGRAM
GUIDE
-
Version
1
Method Principle Pros Cons Limitations DEC Permits Cost
PHYSICAL CONTROL METHODS
Surface Inject oxygen or air to Breaks down thermal Variable; $150-
Reduces taste & odor, Need access to power Article 15
aeration, keep water moving, layer, may move $2500/acre,
reduce nutrient release source, need expert to Protection of
including prevent nutrient nutrients to surface, high DEC funds
in deep lakes, reduces size & install except in Waters may be oxygenation & release from cost for might support surface scums, fast small ponds required
circulation anaerobic sediments aerators/operation projects
Break down of thermal
Reduce taste & odor Needs access to >$2,500/acre,
Inject oxygen or air to layer can be detrimental
Hypolimnetic problems for potable power source/batteries Article 15 DEC funds
prevent nutrient to coldwater fish, nutrient
aeration or water, might enhance for compressors, large Protection of might support
release from diffusion to the surface,
oxygenation deepwater fisheries, hypolimnion, & an Waters may be projects in
anaerobic sediments high cost for aerators and
(not circulation) may improve quality of expert to size & install required some limited
in deep lake areas their operation, takes
downstream water except in small ponds cases
time to be effective
Impacts non-target
Inexpensive & easy for
plants, invertebrates or Article 15
Reduce water level in some waterbodies, can
fish, refill rates Protection of Essentially no
autumn to expose be combined with dock A dam or control
unpredictable, deep Waters and cost if a dam
sediments to winter repair or macrophyte structure is needed,
Drawdown drawdown is needed to Article 24 control
freezing/desiccation control, potential deep drawdown
expose anoxic sediments wetland permits structure is
and to consolidate exposure impact to permitting is unlikely
& cyanobacteria cysts, may be present
sediments overwintering
variable success at best, required
cyanobacteria cysts
takes time
Potential impacts to Mostly valve
Selectively remove Inexpensive if a
aquatic life, potability, operational
water from siphon/deep outfall Article 15
aesthetics (odor & color), costs if a deep
hypolimnion, slowly exists, removes Protection of
Hypolimnetic significant withdrawal Need a deepwater outfall exists,
replenish deepwater nutrient source, Waters permit
Withdrawal rate needed for highly siphon or deep outfall up to $10,000
oxygen, and reduce inconspicuous, may be anoxic hypolimnia, risk of annual
nutrient release from downstream cold water required
destratification, takes operating costs
sediments refugia are created
time for siphons
Multiple units needed, Need local power
Apply 20kHz- 1MHz Consult with
potential effects on non- source (or batteries),
sound waves to regional offices,
Ultrasonic Inconspicuous, works target organisms, need to ultrasonic structure $5,000/unit +
disrupt cyanobacteria may be
waves immediately find correct frequency to may be considered a operating costs
cell walls & gas considered to
target cyanobacteria, regulated fill by permit
vacuoles be pesticidal
requires persistent use offices
7. Appendices
7.1. Appendix A. Glossary
Algal toxin: A toxin produced by cyanobacteria, also called a cyanotoxin. Most are
classified as hepatotoxins, neurotoxins, or other.
Beach: A public swimming area regulated by trained NYSDOH or OPRHP staff and
routinely monitored for public safety.
Bloom: High concentrations of algal cells that may form surface scums, mats, or other
dense accumulations of algal material.
Blue-green algae: An outdated, but still commonly used term for the class of bacteria
now known as cyanobacteria.
Cyanobacteria: Also known as blue-green algae. Photosynthetic prokaryotic bacteria
that can produce toxins and other harmful substances that pose a health risk to humans
or animals exposed through dermal contact, ingestion or inhalation. Cyanobacteria may
be unicellular, colonial, or filamentous. Some genera are capable of fixing nitrogen.
Episodic surveillance/sampling: Conducted outside of programs, or between routine
surveillance/sampling, on an as-observed basis, in reply to bloom reports.
Extent: The geographic span of a bloom along the shoreline; during surveys, extent is
recorded as Small Localized, Large Localized, Widespread/Lakewide, or open water.
Report: Any information regarding a potential bloom including visual surveillance,
submissions of online forms to NYHABS (on.ny.gov/habform or on.ny.gov/habproform),
emails, digital photographs, or bloom samples.
Sampling: Collecting representative water from suspected blooms as a means for
detection and report generation regarding potential blooms.
Scum: An algal bloom with dense surface accumulation of cells or filamentous material.
Status: Bloom designation assigned according to DEC criteria as No Bloom,
Suspicious, Confirmed, or Confirmed with High Toxins.
Surveillance: A report on the visual evaluation of lake conditions as a means for
detecting potential blooms.
29 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
7.2. Appendix B. DEC Suspicious Algal Bloom Report Form
Below are the questions included in the public Suspicious Algal Bloom Report Form. A
digital version of this form is accessible at: on.ny.gov/habform or by going to
www.dec.ny.gov/chemical/77118.
30 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
31 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
32 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
7.3. Appendix C. Warning Sign
This sign is available on the DEC HABs website at: www.dec.ny.gov/chemical/77118
The sign is for lake communities to alert lake users of the potential presence of a HAB
on a waterbody.
33 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3
7.4. Appendix D. References and Resources
• DEC Harmful Algal Blooms webpage
www.dec.ny.gov/chemical/77118
• DEC HABs Brochure
http://www.dec.ny.gov/docs/water_pdf/habsbrochure.pdf
• NYS Department of Health Blue-green Algae and Health webpage
www.health.ny.gov/environmental/water/drinking/bluegreenalgae
• U.S. Environmental Protection Agency: CyanoHABs Webpage
www.epa.gov/cyanohabs
• World Health Organization: Guidelines for Safe Recreational Waters, 2009
www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/water-quality/recreational/guidelines-for-
safe-recreational-environments/en/
• New York Citizens Statewide Lake Assessment Program (CSLAP) Sampling
Protocol
www.dec.ny.gov/docs/water_pdf/cslapsampro.pdf
• New York Federation of Lake Associations
www.nysfola.org
• New York State Soil and Water Conservation District Listing
https://agriculture.ny.gov/soil-and-water/soil-water-conservation-district-offices
• Cyanobacteria HAB Educational Videos:
o NYSDEC: Harmful Algal Bloom (HAB) Identification: Tips and Tricks
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8nL_s77FV-o
o HealthVermont: How to identify cyanobacteria
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ea0EHw5suDs
34 | DEC HABS PROGRAM GUIDE - Version 3